  Florida
  Medicaid

COMMUNITY BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES
   COVERAGE AND LIMITATIONS HANDBOOK

                     Agency for Health Care Administration

                                                 March 2014
                    COMMUNITY BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES
                       COVERAGE AND LIMITATIONS HANDBOOK
                                                UPDATE LOG

How to Use the Update Log

Introduction        The update log provides a history of the handbook updates. Each Florida
                    Medicaid handbook contains an update log.

Obtaining the       When a handbook is updated, the provider will be notified. The notification
Handbook Update     instructs the provider to obtain the updated handbook from the Medicaid fiscal
                    agent's Web site at www.mymedicaid-florida.com. Select Public Information for
                    Providers, then Provider Support, and then Provider Handbooks.

                    Providers who are unable to obtain an updated handbook from the Web site may
                    request a paper copy from the Medicaid fiscal agent's Provider Services Contact
                    Center at 1-800-289-7799.

Explanation of the  Providers can use the update log below to determine if updates to the handbook
Update Log          have been received.

                    Update describes the change that was made.

                    Effective Date is the date that the update is effective.

                    UPDATE                                                    EFFECTIVE DATE
                    Revised Handbook                                          July 2000
                    Replacement Pages                                         July 2000
                    Replacement Pages                                         May 2002
                    Errata Replacement Pages and Pen and Ink Changes          June 2002
                    Revised Handbook                                          October 2004
                    Replacement Handbook                                      March 2014
COMMUNITY BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES
   COVERAGE AND LIMITATIONS HANDBOOK
                    TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter and Topic                      Page

Introduction to the Handbook

          Overview ........................................................................................................................................ i
          Handbook Use .............................................................................................................................. ii
          Characteristics of the Handbook .................................................................................................. iii
          Handbook Updates ...................................................................................................................... iv

Chapter 1 ­ Qualifications, Enrollment, and Requirements

          Overview ....................................................................................................................................1-1
          Purpose and Definitions .............................................................................................................1-1
          Staff Qualifications .....................................................................................................................1-4
          Enrollment ................................................................................................................................1-10
          Requirements ........................................................................................................................... 1-12

Chapter 2 ­ Covered, Limited, and Excluded Services

          Overview ....................................................................................................................................2-1
          General Coverage Information...................................................................................................2-1
          Assessment Services.................................................................................................................2-5
          Treatment Plan Development and Modification .......................................................................2-13
          Medical and Psychiatric Services ............................................................................................2-17
          Behavioral Health Therapy Services........................................................................................2-21
          Community Support and Rehabilitative Services.....................................................................2-26
          Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services for Recipients Under the Age of 21 Years .............2-29
          Nursing Facility Residents........................................................................................................2-34
          Excluded Services....................................................................................................................2-35

Chapter 3 ­ Reimbursement and Fee Schedule

          Overview ....................................................................................................................................3-1
          Reimbursement Information.......................................................................................................3-1
          How to Read the Fee Schedule .................................................................................................3-3

Appendices

          Appendix A: Procedure Codes and Fee Schedule................................................................... A-1
          Appendix B: Temporary Service Authorization ........................................................................ B-1
                   Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

                   INTRODUCTION TO THE HANDBOOK

Overview           This chapter outlines the three types of Florida Medicaid policy handbooks
                   that all enrolled providers must comply with in order to obtain reimbursement.
Introduction       This chapter also describes the format used for the handbooks and instructs
Background         the reader how to use the handbooks.

Federal and State  There are three types of Florida Medicaid handbooks:
Authority
In This Chapter    · Provider General Handbook describes the Florida Medicaid program.
                   · Coverage and limitations handbooks explain covered services, their

                        limits, who is eligible to receive them, and any corresponding fee
                        schedules. Fee schedules can be incorporated within the handbook or
                        separately.
                   · Reimbursement handbooks describe how to complete and file claims for
                        reimbursement from Medicaid.

                   The current Florida Medicaid provider handbooks are posted on the Medicaid
                   fiscal agent's Web site at www.mymedicaid-florida.com. Select Public
                   Information for Providers, then Provider Support, and then Provider
                   Handbooks.

                   The following federal and state laws govern Florida Medicaid:

                   · Title XIX of the Social Security Act
                   · Title 42 of the Code of Federal Regulations
                   · Chapter 409, Florida Statutes
                   · Rule Division 59G, Florida Administrative Code

                   This chapter contains:                                         PAGE
                                                                                     i
                    TOPIC                                                            ii
                    Overview                                                         iii
                    Handbook Use                                                     iv
                    Characteristics of the Handbook
                    Handbook Updates

March 2014                                                                                         i
                  Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Handbook Use      The purpose of the Medicaid handbooks is to educate the Medicaid provider
                  about policies and procedures needed to receive reimbursement for covered
Purpose           services provided to eligible Florida Medicaid recipients.

Provider          The handbooks provide descriptions and instructions on how and when to
                  complete forms, letters, or other documentation.
Recipient
Provider          Term used to describe any entity, facility, person, or group who is enrolled in
General Handbook  the Medicaid program and provides services to Medicaid recipients and bills
                  Medicaid for services.
Coverage and
Limitations       Term used to describe an individual enrolled in Florida Medicaid.
Handbook
                  Information that applies to all providers regarding the Florida Medicaid
Reimbursement     program, recipient eligibility, provider enrollment, fraud and abuse policy, and
Handbook          important resources are included in the Florida Medicaid Provider General
                  Handbook.

                  Each coverage and limitations handbook is named for the service it describes.
                  A provider who renders more than one type of Medicaid service will have
                  more than one coverage and limitations handbook with which they must
                  comply.

                  Most reimbursement handbooks are named for the type of claim form
                  submitted.

March 2014        ii
                   Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Characteristics of the Handbook

Format             The format of the handbook represents a reader-friendly way of displaying
                   material.

Label              Labels are located in the left margin of each information block. They identify
                   the content of the block in order to help scanning and locating information
                   quickly.

Information Block  Information blocks replace the traditional paragraph and may consist of one
                   or more paragraphs about a portion of the subject. Blocks are separated by
                   horizontal lines.

                   Each block is identified or named with a label.

Chapter Topics     Each chapter contains a list of topics on the first page, which serves as a
                   table of contents for the chapter, listing the subjects and the page number
                   where the subject can be found.

Note               Note is used to refer the reader to other important documents or policies
                   contained outside of this handbook.

Page Numbers       Pages are numbered consecutively within each chapter throughout the
                   handbook. The chapter number appears as the first digit before the page
                   number at the bottom of each page.

White Space        The "white space" found throughout a handbook enhances readability and
                   allows space for writing notes.

March 2014                                                                                         iii
                     Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Handbook Updates

Update Log           The first page of each handbook will contain the update log.

                     Every update will contain a new updated log page with the most recent update
                     information added to the log. The provider can use the update log to
                     determine if all updates to the current handbook have been received.

                     Each update will be designated by an "Update" and "Effective Date."

Handbook Update      The Medicaid handbooks will be updated as needed. Updates are classified
Classifications      as either a:

                     · Replacement handbook ­ Major revisions resulting in a rewrite of the
                          existing handbook, without any underlines and strikethroughs throughout
                          the rulemaking process.

                     · Revised handbook ­ Minor revisions resulting in modification of the
                          existing handbook identified during the rulemaking process by underlines
                          and strikethroughs.

Handbook Effective   The effective date of a handbook is the month and year that will appear on the
Date                 final published handbook. The provider can check this date to ensure that the
                     material being used is the most current and up to date.

Identifying New      New information or information moved from one place to another within the
Information          handbook will be identified by an underline on draft versions of the handbook
                     during the development and proposed stages of the rulemaking process (e.g.,
                     new information).

Identifying Deleted  Deleted information will be identified by a line through the middle of the
Information          selected text on draft versions of the handbook during the development and
                     proposed stages of the rulemaking process (e.g., deleted information).

Final Published      The adopted and published version of the handbook will not have underlines
Handbook             (indicating insertions) and text with strikethroughs (indicating deletions).

March 2014                                                                                          iv
                         Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

                                                 CHAPTER 1
            QUALIFICATIONS, ENROLLMENT, AND REQUIREMENTS

Overview

Introduction        This chapter describes Florida Medicaid's community behavioral health
                    services, the specific authority regulating these services, staff qualifications,
                    and provider enrollment and requirements.

Legal Authority     Community behavioral health services are authorized by section 409.906,
                    Florida Statutes (F.S.), and in Rule 59G-4.050, Florida Administrative Code
                    (F.A.C.).

In This Chapter     This chapter contains:

                     TOPIC                                  PAGE
                     Overview                                 1-1
                     Purpose and Definitions                  1-1
                     Staff Qualifications                     1-4
                     Enrollment                              1-10
                     Requirements                            1-12

Purpose and Definitions

Medicaid Provider   This handbook is intended for use by community behavioral health services
Handbooks           providers that render services to eligible Medicaid recipients. It must be used
                    in conjunction with the Florida Medicaid Provider Reimbursement Handbook,
                    CMS-1500, which contains information about specific procedures for
                    submitting claims for payment, and the Florida Medicaid Provider General
                    Handbook, which describes the Florida Medicaid program.

                    Note: The Florida Medicaid provider handbooks are available on the Medicaid
                    fiscal agent's Web site at www.mymedicaid-florida.com. Select Public
                    Information for Providers, then Provider Support, and then Provider
                    Handbooks. All of the Florida Medicaid provider handbooks are incorporated
                    by reference in Rule Division 59G, F.A.C.

Aftercare Planning  The process of planning for a recipient's transition from the current level of
                    care. This process begins during the assessment process when the
                    recipient's needs and possible barriers to care are identified.

                    The recipient and the treating staff should collaborate to develop the
                    recipient's individualized formal aftercare plan. A formal aftercare plan should
                    include community resources, activities, services, and supports that will be
                    utilized to help the recipient sustain gains achieved during treatment.

March 2014                                                  1-1
                        Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Purpose and Definitions, continued

Bachelor's Level        A bachelor's level practitioner who provides services to recipients under the
Infant Mental Health    age of 6 years.
Practitioner

Discharge Criteria      Measurable criteria established at the onset of treatment that identify a
                        recipient's readiness to transition to a new level of care or out of care.
                        Discharge criteria must be included on the recipient's individualized treatment
                        plan and are separate and apart from the recipient's treatment plan goals and
                        objectives.

                        The recipient and the treating staff should collaborate to develop the
                        individualized, measurable discharge criteria. The recipient's progress toward
                        meeting the discharge criteria should be addressed throughout the course of
                        treatment as part of the treatment plan review.

Emotional               A person under the age of 21 years who is diagnosed with a mental,
Disturbance             emotional, or behavioral disorder of sufficient duration to meet one of the
                        diagnostic categories specified in the most recent edition of the Diagnostic
                        and Statistical Manual of the American Psychiatric Association, but who does
                        not exhibit behaviors that substantially interfere with or limit the role or ability
                        to function in the family, school, or community. The emotional disturbance
                        must not be considered to be a temporary response to a stressful situation.

Hub Site                The telecommunication distance site in Florida at which the consulting
                        physician, dentist or therapist is delivering telemedicine services.

Infant Mental Health    A mental health aide who provides services to recipients under the age of 6
Aides                   years.

Institution for Mental  A hospital or other institution of more than 16 beds that is primarily engaged
Disease                 in providing diagnosis, treatment, or care to persons with behavioral diseases
                        in accordance with 42 CFR 435.1010.

Other Responsible       A relative, legal guardian, caretaker, or other individuals and natural supports
Persons                 who are known to the recipient and family and are active in providing care to
                        the recipient.

March 2014                                                                                      1-2
                       Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Purpose and Definitions, continued

Serious Emotional      A person under the age of 21 years who is all of the following:
Disturbance
                       · Diagnosed as having a mental, emotional, or behavioral disorder that
                            meets one of the diagnostic categories specified in the most recent
                            edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders of the
                            American Psychiatric Association.

                       · Exhibits behaviors that substantially interfere with or limit the role or
                            ability to function in the family, school, or community, which behaviors are
                            not considered to be a temporary response to a stressful situation.

Shelter Status         The legal status that begins when a recipient under the age of 18 years is
                       taken into the protective custody of the Department of Children and Families
                       (DCF) and ceases when one of the following occurs:

                       · Court grants custody to a parent.
                       · After disposition of the petition for dependency.
                       · Court orders the child to be released to a parent or placed in the

                            temporary custody of a relative, a nonrelative, or DCF.

Spoke Site             The provider office location in Florida where an approved service is being
                       furnished through telemedicine.

Telemedicine           The practice of health care delivery using telecommunication equipment by
                       the treating provider (at the spoke site) for the provision of approved covered
                       services by the consulting provider (at the hub site) for the purpose of
                       evaluation, diagnosis, or treatment.

Treating Practitioner  A Medicaid-enrolled professional who authorizes services within the purview
                       of that practitioner's credentials and state law on behalf of the Medicaid group
                       provider (provider type 05).

Treatment Team         Key staff involved in planning and providing behavioral health services to the
                       recipient.

March 2014                                                                                         1-3
                      Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Staff Qualifications

General               Community behavioral health provider staff must provide services within the
                      scope of professional licensure or certification, training, protocols, and
                      competence.

                      Providers must maintain staff records with background screening results,
                      state mandated I-9 results, staff qualifications, verification of work
                      experience, reference checks, and evidence of ongoing training. These
                      records must additionally reflect adherence to human resources policies and
                      procedures established by the provider.

Advanced              A licensed ARNP who works in collaboration with a physician according to
Registered Nurse      protocol to provide diagnostic and interventional patient care. An ARNP must
Practitioner (ARNP)   be authorized to provide these services in accordance with Chapter 464,
                      F.S., and protocols filed with the Florida Board of Nursing.

Bachelor's Level      A bachelor's level infant mental health practitioner must have completed 20
Infant Mental Health  hours of documented training in the following areas, prior to working with this
Practitioner          age population:

                      · Early childhood development
                      · Behavior observation
                      · Developmental screening
                      · Parent and child intervention and interaction
                      · Functional assessment
                      · Developmentally appropriate practice for serving infants
                      · Young children and their families
                      · Psychosocial assessment and diagnosis of young children
                      · Crisis intervention training

                      Bachelor's level practitioners who have had the above training through
                      conferences, workshops, continuing education credits, or academic training
                      are not required to repeat the training.

                      Bachelor's level infant mental health practitioners must be supervised by a
                      master's level practitioner with two years of experience with recipients under
                      the age of 6 years or by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts.

March 2014            1-4
                      Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Staff Qualifications, continued

Bachelor's Level      A bachelor's level practitioner must meet all of the following criteria:
Practitioner
                      · A bachelor's degree from an accredited university or college with a major
                           in counseling, social work, psychology, nursing, rehabilitation, special
                           education, health education, or a related human services field.

                      · Training in the treatment of behavioral health disorders, human growth
                           and development, evaluations, assessments, treatment planning, basic
                           counseling and behavior management interventions, case management,
                           clinical record documentation, psychopharmacology, abuse regulations,
                           and recipient rights.

                      · Work under the supervision of a master's level practitioner.

Behavioral Health     A behavioral health technician must:
Technician
                      · Have a high school diploma or equivalent and in-service training in the
                           treatment of mental health disorders, abuse regulations, recipient rights,
                           crisis management interventions, and confidentiality.

                      · Work under the supervision of a bachelor's level practitioner or higher.
                      · Be certified as a behavioral health technician by the Florida Certification

                           Board (FCB).

                      Note: Information on initial and renewal certification requirements can be
                      found on the FCB Web site at www.flcertificationboard.org.

Certified Addictions  A CAP must be certified by the FCB in accordance with Chapter 397, F.S.
Professional (CAP)
                      A bachelor's level CAP must have a bachelor's degree and be certified in
                      accordance with Chapter 397, F.S. by the FCB.

                      A master's level CAP must have a master's degree and be certified in
                      accordance with Chapter 397, F.S. by the FCB.

Certified Associate   A certified associate behavior analyst must be a National Board Certified
Behavior Analyst      Associate Behavior Analyst or Florida Associate Behavior Analyst, who
                      maintains active certification for a Florida Board Certified Associate Behavior
                      Analyst.

Certified Behavior    A certified behavior analyst must be a National Board Certified or Florida
Analyst               Certified Behavior Analyst, who maintains active certification as required for
                      a Florida Board Certified Behavior Analyst. A Board Certified Behavior
                      Analyst may possess a master's degree (BCBA) or doctoral degree
                      (BCBA-D).

March 2014                                                                                      1-5
                       Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Staff Qualifications, continued

Certified Psychiatric  A certified psychiatric rehabilitation practitioner must be certified by the
Rehabilitation         Certification Commission for Psychiatric Rehabilitation, established by the
Practitioner           United States Psychiatric Rehabilitation Association, and is working under the
                       supervision of a bachelor's level practitioner or higher.

Certified Recovery     A certified recovery peer specialist--adult must be certified by the FCB and
Peer Specialist--      must work under the supervision of a bachelor's level practitioner, master's
Adult                  level CAP, or higher.

Certified Recovery     A certified recovery peer specialist--family must be certified by the FCB and
Peer Specialist--      must work under the supervision of a bachelor's level practitioner, master's
Family                 level CAP, or higher.

Certified Recovery     A certified recovery support specialist must be certified by the FCB and must
Support Specialist     work under the supervision of a bachelor's level practitioner, master's level
                       CAP, or higher.

Clinical Social        A clinical social worker must be licensed in accordance with Chapter 491,
Worker                 F.S.

Infant Mental Health   Infant mental health aides must, at a minimum, have a high school diploma or
Aides                  equivalent with at least two years' experience with infants and toddlers, or
                       hold a Child Development Aide certificate.

Licensed Practical     A licensed practical nurse must be licensed to practice practical nursing in
Nurse                  accordance with Chapter 464, F.S.

Licensed               LPHAs include:
Practitioner of the
Healing Arts (LPHA)    · Clinical social workers licensed in accordance with Chapter 491, F.S.
                       · Mental health counselors, licensed in accordance with Chapter 491, F.S.
                       · Marriage and family therapists licensed in accordance with Chapter 491,

                            F.S.
                       · Psychologists licensed in accordance with Chapter 490, F.S.
                       · Clinical nurse specialists (CNS) with a subspecialty in child/adolescent

                            psychiatric and mental health or psychiatric and mental health licensed in
                            accordance with Chapter 496, F.S.
                       · Psychiatric advanced registered nurse practitioners licensed in
                            accordance with Chapter 464, F.S.
                       · Psychiatric physician assistants licensed in accordance with Chapters
                            458 and 459, F.S.

March 2014                                                                                           1-6
                     Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Staff Qualifications, continued

Marriage and Family  A marriage and family therapist must be licensed in accordance with Chapter
Therapist            491, F.S.

Master's Level       A master's level practitioner must have a master's degree from an accredited
Practitioner         university or college with a major in the field of counseling, social work,
                     psychology, nursing, rehabilitation, special education, health education, or a
                     related human services field with one of the following:

                     · Two years of professional experience in providing services to persons
                          with behavioral health disorders.

                     · Current supervision under an LPHA as described in this section.

                     Master's level practitioners hired after July 1, 2014 with degrees other than
                     social work, psychology, marriage and family therapy, or mental health
                     counseling must have completed graduate level coursework in at least four of
                     the following thirteen content areas: human growth and development;
                     diagnosis and treatment of psychopathology; human sexuality; counseling
                     theories and techniques; group theories and practice; dynamics of marriage
                     and family systems; individual evaluation and assessment; career and
                     lifestyle assessment; research and program evaluation; personality theories;
                     social and cultural foundations; counseling in community settings; and
                     substance use disorders.

Medical Assistant    A medical assistant must registered or certified in accordance with Chapter
                     458, F.S.

Mental Health        A mental health counselor must be licensed in accordance with Chapter 491,
Counselor            F.S.

Physician Assistant  A physician assistant must be a graduate of an approved program or its
                     equivalent or meets standards approved by the Florida Board of Medicine and
                     must be certified to perform medical services in accordance with Chapters
                     458 and 459, F.S.

Psychiatric          A psychiatric ARNP must have education or training in psychiatry and be
Advanced             authorized to provide these services in accordance with Chapter 464, F.S.,
Registered Nurse     and protocols filed with the Florida Board of Nursing.
Practitioner (ARNP)

March 2014                                                                                        1-7
                      Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Staff Qualifications, continued

Psychiatric Clinical  A psychiatric CNS must have a subspecialty in child/adolescent psychiatric
Nurse Specialist      and mental health or psychiatric and mental health and be licensed in
(CNS)                 accordance with Chapter 464, F.S., and who must meet all of the following
                      criteria:

                      · A current and active license as a registered nurse in Florida.
                      · A master's degree or higher in nursing as a CNS.
                      · Provide proof of current certification in a specialty area as a CNS from

                           one of the four certifying bodies: American Nurses Credentialing Center,
                           American Association of Critical-Care Nurses, Oncology Nursing
                           Certification Corporation, and National Board for Certification of Hospice
                           and Palliative Nurses; or meets the requirements of Chapter 464, F.S and
                           has provided the required affidavit.
                      · A certificate issued by the Florida Board of Nursing as a CNS.

                      A registered nurse currently enrolled as an LPHA must be licensed as a CNS
                      with a subspecialty of child/adolescent psychiatric and mental health or
                      psychiatric and mental health by January 1, 2016.

Psychiatric           A PPA must be a licensed prescribing physician assistant as defined in
Physician Assistant   Chapter 458 or 459, F.S., with a Psychiatric Certificate of Added Qualification.
(PPA)                 The PPA's supervising physician must be a provider type 25 or 26 that is
                      linked to the community behavioral health group provider type 05.

Psychologist          A psychologist must be licensed in accordance with Chapter 490, F.S.

Registered Nurse      An RN must be licensed to practice professional nursing in accordance with
(RN)                  Chapter 464, F.S.

Substance Abuse       A substance abuse counselor must have a bachelor's degree from an
Counselor             accredited university or college with a major in counseling, social work,
                      psychology, nursing, rehabilitation, special education, health education, or a
                      related human services field. In addition, the counselor must have training in
                      the treatment of substance use disorders, to include signs and symptoms
                      associated with abuse and dependence, human growth and development,
                      evaluations and assessments, treatment planning, addictions counseling and
                      behavior management interventions, twelve-step recovery, case
                      management, clinical record documentation, pharmacology, abuse
                      regulations, patient rights, and special circumstances, such as emergencies,
                      suicide, and out-of-control behavior.

March 2014                                                                                  1-8
                       Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Staff Qualifications, continued

Substance Abuse        A substance abuse technician must have a high school degree or equivalent,
Technician             must be working under the supervision of a bachelor's level practitioner or
                       higher, and one of the following:

                       · In-service training in the treatment of substance use disorders
                       · Five years of experience working directly with recipients experiencing

                            substance use disorders in a treatment setting.

                       The substance abuse technician must be able to function as a member of a
                       recipient's multidisciplinary team, provide therapeutic support, and recognize
                       the signs and symptoms associated with abuse and dependence. The
                       substance abuse technician must be familiar with substance use rules and
                       regulations, confidentiality, twelve-step recovery concepts, clinical record
                       documentation requirements, and patient rights, and be able to respond to
                       special circumstances such as emergencies, suicide, and out-of-control
                       behavior.

Treating Practitioner  Treating practitioners include:

                       · Physician
                       · Psychiatrist
                       · Psychiatric ARNP
                       · PPA
                       · LPHA
                       · Master's level CAP (for the authorization of substance use treatment only)

March 2014                       1-9
                       Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Enrollment

Introduction           The qualifications listed in this section apply to the following providers:

                       · Community behavioral health services (provider type 05)
                       · Treating physicians (provider types 25 and 26)
                       · Treating practitioners (provider type 07)

                       Note: Enrollment forms may be obtained from the Medicaid fiscal agent's
                       Web site at www.mymedicaid-florida.com, select Public Information for
                       Providers, then Provider Support, and then Enrollment, or by calling Provider
                       Enrollment at 1-800-289-7799 and selecting Option 4.

Provider               To enroll as a Medicaid community behavioral health services provider,
Qualifications         providers must meet all of the following:

                       · Employ or have under contract a Medicaid-enrolled psychiatrist or a
                            physician, who is linked with the Medicaid group provider.

                       · Achieve compliance on a community behavioral health services provider
                            pre-enrollment certification review.

                       · Hold a regular (i.e., not probationary or interim) substance abuse license
                            in accordance with Chapter 65D-30, F.A.C., for at least one of the
                            following components, if substance abuse services are provided:

                       · Prevention
                       · Intervention
                       · Outpatient

Treating Practitioner  A treating practitioner must be independently enrolled in the Florida Medicaid
                       program per provider type.

Treating Physician     A treating physician must enroll as a provider type 25 or 26 and must also be
                       linked to a community behavioral health group (provider type 05).

                       Services provided by the treating physician must be reimbursed through the
                       community behavioral health group (provider type 05) provider Medicaid
                       number, not the treating physician's (provider type 25 or 26) Medicaid
                       provider number.

Psychiatric            A psychiatric ARNP must enroll as a provider type 07 and must also be linked
Advanced               to a group provider type 05. To enroll as a provider type 07, a psychiatric
Registered Nurse       ARNP must submit a signed Practitioner Collaborative Agreement form with a
Practitioner (ARNP)    physician (provider type 25 or 26) that is linked to the community behavioral
                       health group (provider type 05). Community behavioral health services
                       provided by a psychiatric ARNP must be reimbursed through the community
                       behavioral health group (provider type 05) Medicaid number.

March 2014             1-10
                       Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Enrollment, continued

Psychiatric            A PPA must enroll as a provider type 07 and must also be linked to a
Physician Assistant    community behavioral health group (provider type 05). To enroll as provider
(PPA)                  type 07, a PPA must submit a signed Practitioner Collaborative Agreement
                       form with a physician (provider type 25 or 26) that is linked to the community
                       behavioral health group (provider type 05).

                       Community behavioral health services provided by a PPA must be
                       reimbursed through the community behavioral health group provider type 05
                       Medicaid number.

Licensed               A treating LPHA must enroll as a provider type 07 and must also be linked to
Practitioner of the    a community behavioral health group (provider type 05) for services rendered
Healing Arts (LPHA)    in the capacity of a treating practitioner in order to be qualified and
                       reimbursed.

Certified Addictions   A CAP with a master's degree must enroll as provider type 07 and must also
Professional (CAP)     be linked to a community behavioral health group (provider type 05) in order
                       to authorize services for treatment for substance use disorders.

Pre-Enrollment         Agencies or organizations seeking enrollment as community behavioral
Provider               health providers must complete a provider pre-enrollment certification review
Certification Review   with Medicaid or its designee, to assure compliance with state and federal
                       guidelines.

Multiple Service       Community behavioral health services agency providers who render services
Locations within the   at more than one service address within the same Medicaid-designated area
Same Medicaid-         are required to submit an application for a new location code to identify each
Designated Area        separate physical address where services are provided. The application for a
                       new location code is an attachment to the Florida Medicaid Provider
                       Enrollment Application.

                       Providers must use the code assigned to the location when billing for
                       services provided at that location.

                       Additional service sites are subject to an on-site review by the local Medicaid
                       area office or its designee.

March 2014             1-11
                       Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Enrollment, continued

Multiple Service       Community behavioral health services agency providers who render services
Locations in           at more than one service address in different Medicaid-designated areas are
Different Medicaid-    required to submit a separate Florida Medicaid Provider Enrollment
Designated Areas       Application for each Medicaid-designated area.

                       Providers must use the code assigned to the location when billing for
                       services provided at that location.

                       Additional service sites are subject to an on-site review by the local Medicaid
                       area office or its designee.

Subcontracting         Florida Medicaid allows a provider to contract with an individual practitioner,
                       but not with another agency for service delivery.

                       As of July 1, 2014, providers are required to retain all contracts with
                       subcontracted staff for no less than five years from the termination date of the
                       contract. Providers must maintain subcontractor records with background
                       screening results, staff qualifications, and verification of work experience.
                       These records must additionally reflect adherence to human resources
                       policies and procedures established by the provider related to subcontracting.

Requirements

Providers Contracted   The service-specific Medicaid coverage and limitations handbooks provide
with Medicaid Health   the minimum requirements for all providers. This includes providers who
Plans                  contract with Florida Medicaid health plans (e.g., provider service networks
                       and health maintenance organizations). Providers shall comply with all of
                       the requirements outlined in this handbook, unless otherwise specified in
                       their contract with the health plan. The provision of services to recipients
                       enrolled in a Medicaid health plan shall not be subject to more stringent
                       criteria or limits than specified in this handbook.

March 2014             1-12
                   Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

                                              CHAPTER 2
                 COVERED, LIMITED, AND EXCLUDED SERVICES

Overview

Introduction       This chapter provides service coverage, limitations, and exclusions
                   information. It also describes who can provide and receive services and any
                   applicable service requirements.

In This Chapter    This chapter contains the following section topics:

                    TOPIC                                                         PAGE
                    Overview                                                        2-1
                    General Coverage Information                                    2-1
                    Assessment Services                                             2-5
                    Treatment Plan Development and Modification                    2-13
                    Medical and Psychiatric Services                               2-17
                    Behavioral Health Therapy Services                             2-21
                    Community Support and Rehabilitative Services                  2-26
                    Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services for Recipients Under   2-29
                    the Age of 21 Years
                    Nursing Facility Residents                                     2-34
                    Excluded Services                                              2-35

General Coverage Information

Medical Necessity  Medicaid reimburses services that are determined medically necessary and
                   do not duplicate another provider's service.

                   Rule 59G-1.010 (166), Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C.) defines
                   "medically necessary" or "medical necessity" as follows:

                   "[T]he medical or allied care, goods, or services furnished or ordered must:

                   (a) Meet the following conditions:
                        1. Be necessary to protect life, to prevent significant illness or
                             significant disability, or to alleviate severe pain;
                        2. Be individualized, specific, and consistent with symptoms or
                             confirmed diagnosis of the illness or injury under treatment, and not
                             in excess of the patient's needs;
                        3. Be consistent with generally accepted professional medical
                             standards as determined by the Medicaid program and not
                             experimental or investigational;

March 2014                                                                        2-1
                     Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

General Coverage Information, continued

Medical Necessity,        4. Be reflective of the level of service that can be safely furnished, and
continued                      for which no equally effective and more conservative or less costly
                               treatment is available statewide; and

                          5. Be furnished in a manner not primarily intended for the convenience
                               of the recipient, the recipient's caretaker, or the provider."

                     "(c) The fact that a provider has prescribed, recommended, or approved
                     medical or allied care, goods, or services does not, in itself, make such care,
                     goods or services medically necessary or a medical necessity or a covered
                     service."

Exceptions to the    As required by federal law, Florida Medicaid provides services to eligible
Limits (Special      recipients under the age of 21 years, if such services are medically
Services) Process    necessary to correct or ameliorate a defect, a condition, or a physical or
                     mental illness. Included are diagnostic services, treatment, equipment,
                     supplies, and other measures described in section 1905(a) of the Social
                     Security Act, codified in Title 42 of the United States Code 1396d(a).

                     Services for recipients under the age of 21 years in excess of limitations
                     described within this handbook or the associated fee schedule may be
                     approved, if medically necessary, through the process described in the
                     Florida Medicaid Provider General Handbook.

Description          Community behavioral health services include mental health and substance
                     abuse services provided to recipients with mental health, substance use, and
                     co-occurring mental health and substance use disorders for the maximum
                     reduction of the recipient's disability and restoration to the best possible
                     functional level.

General Requirement  Providers must request reimbursement only for services that are rendered by
                     individuals employed by, under contract with, or who are compensated
                     monetarily by the provider.

March 2014                                                                                       2-2
                    Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

General Coverage Information, continued

Assessment          Prior to the development of a treatment plan the provider must complete and
Requirement         provide to the recipient an assessment of mental health status, substance
                    use concerns, functional capacity, strengths, and service needs or must
                    have an assessment on file that has been conducted in the last six months.
                    The purpose of the assessment is to gather information to be used in the
                    formulation of a diagnosis and development of a plan of care that includes
                    the discharge criteria.

                    For recipients under the age of 6 years, a comprehensive behavioral health
                    assessment completed within the past year, in accordance with the Florida
                    Medicaid Specialized Therapeutic Services Coverage and Limitations
                    Handbook, may satisfy the current assessment requirement for services.

Recipient Clinical  Providers must maintain a clinical record for each recipient treated that
Record              contains all of the following documentation:

                    · Consent for treatment that is signed by the recipient or the recipient's
                         legal guardian. An explanation must be provided for signatures omitted
                         in situations of exception.

                    · An evaluation or assessment that, at a minimum, contains the
                         components of a brief behavioral health status examination conducted
                         by a physician, psychiatrist, a licensed practitioner of the healing arts
                         (LPHA), or master's level certified addictions professional (CAP) for
                         diagnostic and treatment planning purposes. For new admissions, the
                         evaluation or assessment by an LPHA for treatment planning purposes
                         must have been completed within the past six months.

                    · Copies of relevant assessments, reports, and tests.
                    · Service notes (progress toward treatment plans and goals).
                    · Documentation of service eligibility, if applicable.
                    · Current treatment plans (within the last six months), reviews, and

                         addenda.
                    · Copies of all certification forms (e.g., comprehensive behavioral health

                         assessment).
                    · The practitioner's orders and results of diagnostic and laboratory tests.
                    · Documentation of medication assessment, prescription, and

                         management.

                    Note: For information about electronic records, see the Florida Medicaid
                    Provider General Handbook.

March 2014                               2-3
                 Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

General Coverage Information, continued

General Service  Providers must maintain documentation to support each service for which
Documentation    Medicaid reimbursement is requested; clearly distinguish and reference each
Requirements     separate service billed; and be authenticated with the dated signature of the
                 individual who rendered the service. The date of a claim should be the same
                 as the date the service was rendered.

                 Service documentation must contain all of the following:

                 · Recipient's name
                 · Date the service was rendered
                 · Start and end times
                 · Identification of the setting in which the service was rendered
                 · Identification of the specific problem, behavior, or skill deficit for which the

                      service is being provided
                 · Identification of the service rendered
                 · Updates regarding the recipient's progress toward meeting treatment-

                      related goals and objectives addressed during the provision of a service
                 · Dated signature of the individual who rendered the service
                 · Printed or stamped name identifying the signature of the individual who

                      rendered the service and the credentials (e.g., licensed clinical social
                      worker) or functional title (e.g., treating practitioner)

                 Note: For information about electronic signatures, see the Florida Medicaid
                 Provider General Handbook.

Compliance and   Provider's compliance with service eligibility determination procedures,
Quality of Care  service authorization policy, staffing requirements, and service documentation
Reviews          requirements can be reviewed periodically by AHCA or its designee.
                 Providers that violate these requirements are subject to recoupments, fines,
                 or termination in accordance with section 409.913, F.S.

March 2014                               2-4
                     Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

General Coverage Information, continued

Telemedicine         Services must be delivered from a facility that is enrolled in Medicaid as a
                     community behavioral health services provider for Medicaid to reimburse for
                     services delivered through telemedicine. Services that can be provided
                     through telemedicine are listed in the Procedure Codes and Fee Schedule,
                     found in the appendices.

                     The following interactions do not constitute reimbursable telemedicine
                     services:

                     · Telephone conversations
                     · Video cell phone interactions
                     · E-mail messages
                     · Facsimile transmission
                     · "Store and forward" visits and consultations, which are transmitted after

                          the recipient or psychiatrist is no longer available

                     Providers utilizing telemedicine must implement technical written policies and
                     procedures for telemedicine systems that comply with the Health Insurance
                     Portability and Accountability Act privacy regulations as well as applicable
                     state and federal laws that pertain to patient privacy. Policies and procedures
                     must also address the technical safeguards required by Title 45, Code of
                     Federal Regulations, section 164.312, where applicable.

Assessment Services

Introduction         All assessment services must be billed with the correct procedure code and
                     modifier found in the appendices. Assessment services include the following:

                     · Psychiatric evaluation
                     · Brief behavioral health status examination
                     · Psychiatric review of records
                     · In-depth assessment
                     · Bio-psychosocial evaluation
                     · Psychological testing
                     · Limited functional assessment

Assessment           In addition to meeting the general documentation requirements, a written
Documentation        report of evaluation and testing results for services listed in this section must
Requirements         be completed by the individual rendering the service.

March 2014                               2-5
                  Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Assessment Services, continued

Psychiatric       A psychiatric evaluation is a comprehensive evaluation that investigates the
Evaluation        recipient's clinical status.

                  The purpose of a psychiatric evaluation is to establish a therapeutic doctor­
                  patient relationship, gather accurate data in order to formulate a diagnosis,
                  and initiate an effective treatment plan.

                  A psychiatric evaluation must be conducted at the onset of illness. It can be
                  utilized again if an extended hiatus occurs, a marked change in mental status
                  occurs, or admission or readmission to an inpatient setting for a psychiatric
                  illness is being considered or occurs.

                  Provision of a psychiatric evaluation is not considered necessary when the
                  recipient has a previously established diagnosis of organic brain disorder
                  (dementia), unless there has been a change in mental status requiring an
                  evaluation to rule-out additional psychiatric or neurological processes that
                  may be treatable.

Evaluation        A psychiatric evaluation must provide information on the following
Components        components:

                  · Presenting problems
                  · History of the presenting illness or problem
                  · Psychiatric history
                  · Physical history
                  · Trauma history
                  · Medication history
                  · Alcohol and other drug use history
                  · Relevant personal and family medical history
                  · Personal strengths
                  · Mental health status examination
                  · Summary of findings
                  · Diagnostic formulation
                  · Treatment recommendations or plan

Who Must Provide  A psychiatric evaluation must be provided by one of the following qualified
                  treating practitioners:

                  · Treating physician
                  · Treating psychiatrist
                  · Psychiatric physician assistant (PPA)
                  · Psychiatric ARNP

March 2014                                                                                     2-6
                  Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Assessment Services, continued

Brief Behavioral  A brief behavioral health status examination is a brief clinical, psychiatric,
Health Status     diagnostic, or evaluative interview to assess behavioral stability or treatment
Examination       status. A brief behavioral health status examination must be completed prior
                  to the development of the recipient's individualized treatment plan.

                  A brief behavioral health status examination is not required when a psychiatric
                  evaluation, bio-psychosocial assessment, or in-depth assessment has been
                  completed by a physician, psychiatrist, LPHA, or a master's level CAP within
                  six months prior to the development of recipient's treatment plan.

Examination       A brief behavioral health status examination must provide information on all of
Components        the following components:

                  · Purpose of the exam
                  · Mental health status
                  · Summary of findings
                  · Diagnostic formulation
                  · Treatment recommendations or plan

Who Must Provide  A brief behavioral health status examination must be provided by one of the
                  following qualified practitioners:

                  · Physician
                  · Psychiatrist
                  · LPHA
                  · Master's level CAP on the behalf of recipients with a primary diagnosis of

                       a substance use disorder and no co-occurring mental health concerns

March 2014                      2-7
                    Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Assessment Services, continued

Psychiatric Review  A psychiatric review of records includes a review of a recipient records,
of Records          psychiatric reports, psychometric or projective tests, and clinical and
                    psychological evaluation data for diagnostic use in evaluating and planning
                    for recipient care. A written report must be done by the individual rendering
                    the service and must be included in the recipient's clinical record.

                    A psychiatric review of records does not include a review of the provider
                    agency's own records except for psychological testing and other evaluations
                    or evaluative data used explicitly to address documented diagnostic
                    questions.

Who Must Provide    A psychiatric review of records must be provided by one of the following
                    qualified practitioners:

                    · Physician
                    · Psychiatrist
                    · PPA
                    · Psychiatric ARNP

Specific            A psychiatric review of records may be documented in a report format or by a
Documentation       progress note in the recipient's clinical record.
Requirements
                    The sole use of checklists or fill in the blank forms is not allowed.

In-Depth            An in-depth assessment is a diagnostic tool for gathering information to
Assessment          establish or support a diagnosis, to provide the basis for the development of
                    or modification to the treatment plan, and to develop the discharge criteria.
                    The in-depth assessment must include an integrated summary as described
                    here.

                    Written documentation must be included in the recipient's clinical record to
                    support the recipient's eligibility for this service.

March 2014                                                                                    2-8
            Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Assessment Services, continued

Assessment  The in-depth assessment must provide detailed information on all the
Components  following components:

            · Chief complaint--recipient's perception of problems, needs, or prominent
                 symptoms.

            · Personal history, including:
                 - Identifying information
                 - Medical
                 - Alcohol and other drug use
                 - Traumatic experiences
                 - Legal involvement
                 - Educational analysis
                 - Resources and strengths.

             · History of treatment (as applicable), including:
                 - Psychiatric treatment to include previous and current psychotropic
                      medications
                 - Inpatient behavioral health treatment
                 - Acute care treatment
                 - Therapy and counseling
                 - Mental health status examination
                 - Desired services and goals from the recipient's viewpoint
                 - Treatment recommendations or plan

            For recipients under the age of 6 years, the in-depth assessment must include
            the following additional components:

            · Presenting symptoms and behaviors
            · Developmental and medical history: history of the mother's pregnancy and

                 the recipient's delivery, past and current medical conditions, and
                 developmental milestones
            · Family psychosocial and medical history (can be as reported or based
                 upon collateral information)
            · Family functioning, cultural and communication patterns, and current
                 environmental conditions and stressors
            · Clinical interview with the primary caretaker and observation of the
                 caregiver­infant or ­child relationship and interactive patterns
            · Provider's observation and assessment of the recipient, including
                 affective, language, cognitive, motor, sensory, self-care, and social
                 functioning

March 2014                      2-9
                    Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Assessment Services, continued

Who Can Receive     A new in-depth assessment can be provided to recipients who meet one of
                    the following criteria:

                    · Recipients who are being admitted to treatment when it is documented
                         that a psychosocial evaluation or bio-psychosocial evaluation was
                         insufficient in providing a comprehensive basis for treatment planning.

                    · Recipients who have been identified as high-risk.
                    · Recipients, under the age of 6 years, who are exhibiting symptoms of an

                         emotional or behavior nature that are atypical for the child's age and
                         development.

                    An established patient in-depth assessment may be provided to recipients
                    who meet one of the following criteria:

                    · Recipients for whom outpatient services, as initially prescribed, have been
                         unsuccessful and whose clinical record documents a need for a more
                         intensive level of treatment.

                    · Recipients who have been identified through the utilization management
                         process as being high risk or high utilizers of behavioral health services.

Who Must Provide    The in-depth assessment and integrated summary must be provided by one
                    of the following qualified practitioners:

                    · Physician
                    · Psychiatrist
                    · LPHA
                    · Master's level CAP
                    · Master's level practitioner

                    For recipients, under the age of 6 years, the in-depth assessment must be
                    provided by one of the above professionals who has training and experience
                    in infant, toddler, and early childhood development and the observation and
                    assessment of young children.

Integrated Summary  The integrated summary is developed after the in-depth assessment has
Specific            been completed. The integrated summary is written to evaluate, integrate,
Documentation       and interpret from a broad perspective, the history and assessment
Requirements        information collected. The summary identifies and prioritizes the recipient's
                    service needs, establishes a diagnosis, provides an evaluation of the efficacy
                    of past interventions, and helps to establish discharge criteria.

                    The integrated summary must meet the assessment documentation
                    standards defined in this handbook.

March 2014                      2-10
                  Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Assessment Services, continued

Bio-Psychosocial  A bio-psychosocial evaluation describes the biological, psychological, and
Evaluation        social factors that may have contributed to the recipient's need for services.
                  The evaluation includes a brief mental status exam and preliminary service
                  recommendations.

                  When it is consistent with the recipient's treatment needs, bio-psychosocial
                  evaluations can be completed using telemedicine.

Evaluation        A bio-psychosocial evaluation must provide information on all the following
Components        components:

                  · Presenting problems
                  · Biological factors
                  · Psychological factors
                  · Social factors
                  · Mental health status examination
                  · Summary of findings
                  · Diagnostic impression
                  · Treatment recommendations or plan

Who Must Provide  A bio-psychosocial evaluation must be provided by one of the following
                  qualified practitioners:

                  · Physician
                  · Psychiatrist
                  · LPHA
                  · Master's level CAP
                  · Master's level practitioner
                  · CAP
                  · Bachelor's level practitioner

Who Must Review   A bio-psychosocial evaluation completed by a bachelor's level practitioner
                  must be reviewed, signed, and dated by a master's level practitioner,
                  bachelor's level CAP, or a treating practioner prior to completion of the
                  treatment planning process. The review must include clinical impressions, a
                  provisional diagnosis, and a statement by the reviewer that indicates
                  concurrence or alternative recommendations regarding treatment.

March 2014                                                                                2-11
                    Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Assessment Services, continued

Psychological       Psychological testing is the assessment, evaluation, and diagnosis of the
Testing             recipient's mental status or psychological condition through the use of
                    standardized testing methodologies.

Who Can Receive     Recipients are eligible to receive psychological testing only under one or more
                    of the following circumstances:

                    · At the onset of illness or suspected illness or when the recipient first
                         presents for treatment.

                    · If an extended hiatus in treatment or a marked change in status occurs, or
                         if the recipient is being considered for admission or readmission to a
                         psychiatric inpatient setting.

                    · When there is difficulty determining a diagnosis or where there are
                         differential diagnostic impressions.

                    · When additional information is needed to evaluate or redirect treatment
                         efforts.

Who Must Provide    Psychological testing must be provided by an individual practitioner within the
                    scope of professional licensure, training, protocols, and competence.

Limited Functional  A limited functional assessment is restricted to administration of the
Assessment          Functional Assessment Rating Scale (FARS), and the Children's Functional
                    Assessment Rating Scale (C-FARS), the American Society of Addiction
Who Must Provide    Medicine Patient Placement Criteria (ASAM PPC-2R), or any other functional
                    assessment required by the Department of Children and Families (DCF).

                    When it is consistent with the recipient's treatment needs, limited functional
                    assessments can be completed using telemedicine.

                    The FARS and the C-FARS must be provided by an individual who is certified
                    by DCF to administer the assessment.

                    As of July 1, 2014, the American Society of Addiction Medicine Patient
                    Placement Criteria must be provided by an individual who has completed
                    provider agency training on how to use the instrument to make accurate level
                    of care determinations.

March 2014                                                                                     2-12
                   Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Treatment Plan Development and Modification

Introduction       A treatment plan is an individualized, structured, and goal-oriented schedule
                   of services with measurable objectives that promotes the maximum reduction
                   of the recipient's disability and restoration to the best possible functional level.
                   Treatment plan development and modification include:

                   · Treatment plan development
                   · Treatment plan review

                   Individualized recipient treatment plans must directly address the primary
                   diagnosis(es) that is(are) consistent with the assessment.

                   A treatment plan should directly address additional diagnoses that are
                   consistent with assessment and that are in the range of the provider's
                   expertise. The provider must document efforts to coordinate services for
                   diagnoses outside their expertise that, if treated, would assist meeting the
                   recipient's goals.

                   Community behavioral health services must be prescribed on a treatment
                   plan authorized by one of the group provider's treating practitioners.

Treatment Plan     The treatment plan must be jointly developed by the recipient and the
Development        treatment team. The treatment plan must be recipient-centered and
                   consistent with the recipient's identified strengths, abilities, needs, and
                   preferences.

                   The recipient's parent, guardian, or legal custodian should be included in the
                   development of the recipient's individualized treatment plan, if the recipient is
                   under the age of 18 years. Treatment planning for a recipient under the age
                   of 18 years that does not include the recipient's parent, guardian, or legal
                   custodian in a situation of exception requires a documented explanation.

Required           The treatment plan must contain all of the following components:
Components of the
Treatment Plan     · The recipient's diagnosis code(s) consistent with assessment(s)
                   · Goals that are individualized, strength-based, and appropriate to the

                        recipient's diagnosis, age, culture, strengths, abilities, preferences, and
                        needs, as expressed by the recipient
                   · Measurable objectives with target completion dates that are identified for
                        each goal
                   · A list of the services to be provided (treatment plan development,
                        treatment plan review, and evaluation or assessment services provided to
                        establish a diagnosis and to gather information for the development of the
                        treatment plan need not be listed)
                   · The amount, frequency, and duration of each service for the six month
                        duration of the treatment plan (e.g., four units of therapeutic behavioral
                        on-site services two days per week for six months). It is not permissible to
                        use the terms "as needed," "p.r.n.," or to state that the recipient will
                        receive a service "x to y times per week"

March 2014                                   2-13
                      Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Treatment Plan Development and Modification, continued

Required              · Dated signature of the recipient
Components of the     · Dated signature of the recipient's parent, guardian, or legal custodian (if
Treatment Plan,
continued                  the recipient is under the age of 18 years)
                      · Signatures of the treatment team members who participated in

                           development of the plan
                      · A signed and dated statement by the treating practitioner that services are

                           medically necessary and appropriate to the recipient's diagnosis and
                           needs
                      · Discharge criteria

Exceptions to the     If the recipient's age or clinical condition precludes participation in the
Requirement for       development and signing of the treatment plan, an explanation must be
Recipient's           provided on the treatment plan.
Signature

Exceptions to the     There are exceptions to the requirement for a signature by the recipient's
Requirement for       parent, guardian, or legal custodian. Documentation and justification of the
Signature of Parent,  exception must be provided in the recipient's clinical record. The following
Guardian, or Legal    exceptions are:
Custodian
                      · As allowed by Chapter 397, F.S., recipients under the age of 18 years
                           seeking substance use services from a licensed service provider.
                           Recipients ages 13 years and older, experiencing an emotional crisis in
                           accordance with section 394.4784 (1), (2), F.S.

                      · Recipients in the custody of the Department of Juvenile Justice who have
                           been court ordered into treatment or require emergency treatment such
                           that delay in providing treatment would endanger the mental or physical
                           well-being of the recipient. The signature of the parent, guardian, or legal
                           custodian must be obtained as soon as possible after emergency
                           treatment is administered.

                      · For recipients in the care and custody of the DCF (foster care or shelter
                           status), the child's DCF or Community Based Care (CBC) caseworker
                           must sign the treatment plan if it is not possible to obtain the parent's
                           signature. The caseworker and foster parent should be encouraged to
                           participate in the treatment planning. In cases where DCF is working
                           toward reunification, the parent should be involved and must sign the
                           treatment plan.

March 2014                                                                                         2-14
                   Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Treatment Plan Development and Modification, continued

Authorization and  The treatment plan becomes effective on the date it is signed and dated by
Effective Date of  the treating practitioner. Medicaid will reimburse for services provided within
Treatment Plan     45 days prior to the signature of the treating practitioner.

Reimbursement      Medicaid reimburses for one treatment plan development per provider, per
Limitations        state fiscal year (July 1 through June 30). Medicaid reimburses for a
                   maximum total of two treatment plans per recipient, per state fiscal year (July
                   1 through June 30).

Use of Addendum    An addendum may be used to make changes to the treatment plan, when
                   significant changes have not occurred, in lieu of rewriting the entire plan. A
                   treatment plan addendum can be used to add additional services or to modify
                   services prescribed on the treatment plan. The addendum becomes part of
                   the recipient's treatment plan. The addendum must be signed and dated by
                   the treating practitioner and the recipient.

                   Development of an addendum is not a reimbursable service.

Temporary Service  Anytime there is a temporary increase in prescribed services, the provider
Authorization      must report the increase using the Temporary Service Authorization, found in
                   the appendices.

                   The Temporary Service Authorization can be used to report the provision of
                   crisis-oriented services that are not prescribed in the treatment plan. This
                   form may also be used for documenting the need for services already
                   provided when a recipient leaves treatment prior to completion of the
                   treatment plan. When used for this purpose, the form must be completed
                   within 45 days of intake and the recipient's file must reflect the recipient has
                   been discharged from services. The Temporary Service Authorization must
                   be completed, signed, and dated by a treating practitioner and placed in the
                   recipient's clinical record.

                   The Temporary Service Authorization cannot be used to add ongoing
                   services to a recipient's treatment plan.

March 2014                                              2-15
                  Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Treatment Plan Development and Modification, continued

Treatment Plan    The treatment plan review is a process conducted by the treatment team to
Review            ensure that treatment goals, objectives, and services continue to be
                  appropriate to the recipient's needs and to assess the recipient's progress
                  and continued need for services. The treatment plan review requires the
                  participation of the recipient and the treatment team identified in the
                  recipient's individualized treatment plan as responsible for addressing the
                  treatment needs of the recipient.

Frequency of the  A formal review of the treatment plan must be conducted at least every six
Treatment Plan    months. The treatment plan may be reviewed more often than once every six
Review            months when significant changes occur.

Specific          Activities, notations of discussions, findings, conclusions, and
Documentation     recommendations must be documented during the treatment plan review. Any
Requirements      modifications or additions to the treatment plan must be documented based
                  on the results of the review.

                  The treatment plan review must contain all of the following components:

                  · Current diagnosis code(s) and justification for any changes in diagnosis
                  · Recipient's progress toward meeting individualized goals and objectives
                  · Recipient's progress toward meeting individualized discharge criteria
                  · Updates to aftercare plan
                  · Findings
                  · Recommendations
                  · Dated signature of the recipient
                  · Dated signature of the recipient's parent, guardian, or legal custodian (if

                       the recipient is under the age of 18 years)
                  · Signatures of the treatment team members who participated in review of

                       the plan
                  · A signed and dated statement by the treating practitioner that services

                       are medically necessary and appropriate to the recipient's diagnosis and
                       needs

                  If the treatment plan review process indicates that the goals and objectives
                  have not been met, documentation must reflect the treatment team's re-
                  assessment of services and justification if no changes are made.

                  The written documentation must be included in the recipient's clinical record
                  upon completion of the treatment plan review activities.

March 2014                                              2-16
                  Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Medical and Psychiatric Services

Introduction      These services include evaluation of the need for medication; evaluation of
                  clinical effectiveness and side effects of medication; prescribing, dispensing,
                  and administering of psychiatric medications; medication education and
                  facilitating informed consent (including discussing side effects, risks, benefits,
                  and alternatives with the recipient or other responsible persons); planning
                  related to service delivery; and evaluating the status of the recipient's
                  community functioning. Medication management cannot be provided in a
                  group.

                  The following services are included under medical and psychiatric services:

                  · Medication management
                  · Brief individual medical psychotherapy
                  · Brief group medical therapy
                  · Behavioral health-related medical screening services
                  · Behavioral health-related services: verbal interactions
                  · Behavioral health-related services: alcohol and other drug testing

                       specimen collection
                  · Medication assisted treatment

Medication        Medication management is the review of relevant laboratory test results, prior
Management        pharmacy interventions (e.g., medication dosages, blood levels if available,
                  and treatment duration), and current medication usage. Medication
                  management includes the discussion of indications and contraindications for
                  treatment, risks, and management strategies with the recipient or other
                  responsible persons.

Who Must Provide  Medication management must be provided by one of the following qualified
                  practitioners:

                  · Physician
                  · Psychiatrist
                  · PA
                  · PPA
                  · Psychiatric ARNP

Brief Individual  Brief individual medical psychotherapy is treatment activity designed to
Medical           reduce maladaptive behaviors related to the recipient's behavioral health
Psychotherapy     disorder, to maximize behavioral self-control, or to restore normalized
                  functioning and more appropriate interpersonal and social relationships. Brief
                  medical psychotherapy includes insight-oriented, cognitive behavioral, or
                  supportive therapy interventions.

March 2014                        2-17
                     Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Medical and Psychiatric Services, continued

Who Must Provide     Brief individual medical psychotherapy must be provided by one of the
                     following qualified practitioners:

                     · Physician
                     · Psychiatrist
                     · PA
                     · PPA
                     · Psychiatric ARNP

Brief Group Medical  Brief group medical therapy is a treatment activity designed to reduce
Therapy              maladaptive behaviors; maximize behavioral self-control; or to restore
                     normalized functioning, reality orientation, and emotional adjustment. This
                     service includes continuing medical diagnostic evaluation and drug
                     management, when indicated, and can include insight oriented, cognitive
                     behavioral, or supportive therapy.

Who Must Provide     Brief group medical therapy must be provided by one of the following qualified
                     practitioners:

                     · Physician
                     · Psychiatrist
                     · PPA
                     · Psychiatric ARNP
                     · Psychiatric nurse

Group Size           Medicaid will reimburse for brief group medical therapy where the total group
Restrictions         size equals 10 or fewer participants.

Behavioral Health-   A behavioral health-related medical screening service must include a face-to-
Related Medical      face assessment of physical status, a brief history, and decision-making of
Screening Service    low complexity.

                     The assessment must include, at a minimum:

                     · Vital signs.
                     · Medication concerns to include side effects.
                     · Brief mental health status assessment.
                     · Plan for follow-up, if indicated.

March 2014                                                                                  2-18
                    Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Medical and Psychiatric Services, continued

Who Must Provide    Behavioral health-related medical screening services must be provided by
                    one of the following qualified practitioners:

                    · Physician
                    · Psychiatrist
                    · PPA
                    · Physician assistant
                    · Psychiatric ARNP
                    · ARNP
                    · Psychiatric nurse
                    · Registered nurse

Behavioral Health-  This procedure code covers a verbal interaction (15-minute minimum)
Related Medical     between a qualified medical professional and a recipient. This service must
Services: Verbal    be directly related to the recipient's behavioral health disorder or to monitor
Interactions        side effects associated with medication.

Who Must Provide    For behavioral health-related medical services, verbal interactions must be
                    provided by one of the following qualified practitioners:

                    · Physician
                    · Psychiatrist
                    · PPA
                    · Physician assistant
                    · Psychiatric ARNP
                    · ARNP
                    · Psychiatric nurse
                    · Registered nurse

Behavioral Health-  The corresponding procedure code covers the following services:
Related Medical
Services: Medical   · Specimen collection (for the purposes of medication management)
Procedures          · Taking of vital signs
                    · Administering injections

                    This service must be directly related to the recipient's behavioral health
                    disorder or to monitor side effects associated with psychotropic medication.

March 2014                                   2-19
                    Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Medical and Psychiatric Services, continued

Who Must Provide    For behavioral health-related medical services, medical procedures must be
                    provided by one of the following qualified practitioners:

                    · Physician
                    · Psychiatrist
                    · PPA
                    · Physician assistant
                    · Psychiatric ARNP
                    · ARNP
                    · Psychiatric nurse
                    · Registered nurse
                    · Licensed practical nurse
                    · Medical assistant

Behavioral Health-  This procedure code covers specimen collection for the purposes of alcohol
Related Medical     and other drug testing for the treatment of substance use disorders.
Services: Alcohol
and Other Drug
Screening
Specimen
Collection

Who Must Provide    For behavioral health-related medical services, alcohol and other drug
                    screening specimen collection must be provided by one of the following
                    qualified practitioners:

                    · Physician
                    · Psychiatrist
                    · PPA
                    · Physician assistant
                    · Psychiatric ARNP
                    · ARNP
                    · Psychiatric nurse
                    · Registered nurse
                    · Licensed practical nurse
                    · Medical assistant
                    · LPHA
                    · Master's level CAP
                    · Master's level practitioner
                    · CAP
                    · Bachelor's level practitioner
                    · Certified recovery peer specialist
                    · Certified psychiatric rehabilitation practitioner
                    · Certified recovery support specialist
                    · Certified behavioral health technician
                    · Substance abuse technician

March 2014                                                                                  2-20
                     Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Medical and Psychiatric Services, continued

Medication-Assisted  Services for medication-assisted treatment is reimbursed for opioid addiction
Treatment            treatment by a program licensed by the state and certified by the Federal
                     Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), in
                     accordance with state and federal regulations.

                     Recipients receiving methadone treatment can be prescribed take-home
                     doses after 30 days of treatment, if it is clinically indicated. In order to qualify
                     for take-home doses, it must be documented that a recipient is participating in
                     a methadone maintenance regimen, in addition to meeting the conditions
                     outlined in Rule 65D-30.014, F.A.C.

Who Must Provide     Medication-assisted treatment services must be provided under the
                     supervision of a physician or a psychiatrist. Medication-assisted treatment
                     must be provided by one of the following qualified practitioners:

                     · Physician
                     · Psychiatrist
                     · PPA
                     · Physician assistant
                     · Psychiatric ARNP
                     · ARNP
                     · Psychiatric nurse
                     · Registered nurse
                     · Licensed practical nurse
                     · Medical assistant

Behavioral Health Therapy Services

Introduction         Behavioral health therapy services include:

                     · Individual and family therapy
                     · Group therapy
                     · Behavioral health day services

Individual and       Individual and family therapy services include the provision of insight-
Family Therapy       oriented, cognitive behavioral or supportive therapy interventions to an
                     individual recipient or a recipient's family.

                     Individual and family therapy may involve the recipient, the recipient's family
                     without the recipient present, or a combination of therapy with the recipient
                     and the recipient's family. The focus or primary beneficiary of individual and
                     family therapy services must always be the recipient.

March 2014                                                        2-21
                   Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Behavioral Health Therapy Services, continued

Who Must Provide   Individual and family therapy services must be provided by one of the
                   following qualified practitioners:

                   · Physician
                   · Psychiatrist
                   · PPA
                   · Psychiatric ARNP
                   · LPHA
                   · Master's level CAP
                   · Master's level practitioner

Group Therapy      Group therapy services include the provision of cognitive behavioral or
                   supportive therapy interventions to an individual recipient or the recipient's
                   family.

                   In addition to counseling, group therapy services to recipient families or other
                   responsible persons include educating, the sharing of clinical information, and
                   guidance on how to assist the recipient.

Who Must Provide   Group therapy services must be provided by one of the following qualified
                   practitioners:

                   · Physician
                   · Psychiatrist
                   · PPA
                   · Psychiatric ARNP
                   · LPHA
                   · Master's level CAP
                   · Master's level practitioner
                   · CAP
                   · Bachelor's level practitioner

Group Size         Medicaid will reimburse for group therapy where the total group size is equal
Restrictions       to 15 or fewer participants.

Behavioral Health  These services are designed to enable recipients to function successfully in
Day Services       the community in the least restrictive environment and to restore or enhance
                   ability for personal, social, and prevocational life management services.
                   Behavioral health day services utilize an intensive therapeutic treatment
                   approach to stabilize the symptoms of behavioral health disorders. These
                   services should be used to provide transitional treatment after an acute
                   episode or to reduce or eliminate the need for more intensive levels of care.

March 2014                                                                                    2-22
                      Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Behavioral Health Therapy Services, continued

Behavioral Health     Behavioral health day services are appropriate early childhood therapeutic
Day Services,         services provided to recipients ages 2 years through 5 years who are
continued             experiencing emotional problems and who meet the eligibility criteria
                      described below. Services are designed to strengthen individual and family
                      functioning, prevent more restrictive placement of recipients, and provide an
                      integrated set of interventions to promote behavioral and emotional
                      adjustments.

                      Services must be provided in a therapeutic milieu that allows for a broad
                      range of therapeutic activities designed for the treatment of specific social,
                      emotional, and behavioral problems. Services must be delivered in a
                      coordinated manner and must be appropriate for the developmental age of
                      the recipient. Services must be individualized and directly related to the
                      treatment plan goals and the long-term goal of returning the recipient to
                      regular day care, preschool, or the least restrictive environment possible.

Eligibility Criteria  In order to receive behavioral health day services a recipient must:

                      · Be age 2 years and older.
                      · Score in at least the moderate impairment range on a behavior and

                           functional rating scale developed for this age group.

Components of         Behavioral health day services are comprised of individual, group, or family
Behavioral Health     therapy services, and therapeutic care services.
Day Services
                      Individual and family therapy services include the provision of insight-
                      oriented, cognitive behavioral or supportive therapy to an individual recipient
                      or family.

                      Individual and family therapy may involve the recipient, the recipient's family
                      without the recipient present, or a combination of therapy with the recipient
                      and the recipient's family. The focus or primary beneficiary of individual and
                      family therapy services must always be the recipient.

                      Group therapy services include the provision of cognitive behavioral,
                      supportive therapy, or counseling to individuals or families, and consultation
                      with family or other responsible persons for sharing of clinical information.
                      Also included is education, counseling, or advising family or other responsible
                      persons on how to assist the recipient. Group therapy services include the
                      provision of cognitive behavioral, supportive therapy, or counseling to
                      recipients and their families.

                      In addition to counseling, group therapy services to recipient families and
                      other responsible persons include education, the sharing of clinical
                      information, and guidance on how to assist recipients.

March 2014                                                                                  2-23
                       Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Behavioral Health Therapy Services, continued

Components of          Therapeutic care services assist the recipient in the development of the skills
Behavioral Health      necessary for independent living and for symptom management. Progress
Day Services,          toward treatment goals related to therapeutic care services should be
continued              assessed through observation.

Program                Behavioral health day services for recipients ages 2 years through 5 years
Requirements for       must meet the following requirements:
Recipients Ages
2 Years Through        · Services must be provided for a minimum of two to a maximum of four
5 Years                     hours within the day. This need not be a continuous time period, but must
                            be provided in one day. Therapeutic activities, as listed in the recipient's
                            treatment plan, must be interwoven throughout the recipient's scheduled
                            activities.

                       · The day treatment program must have a parent or caregiver component.
                            At a minimum, there should be a monthly face-to-face contact with the
                            parent or caregiver at the day treatment center or at the recipient's home.

                       · If the provider is unable to involve the parent or caregiver or meet the
                            requirement for the face-to-face contact, a telephone contact is allowable,
                            but is not reimbursable as part of day treatment. Written justification of
                            why the face-to-face intervention could not occur must be provided in the
                            recipient's clinical record.

                       · The group size during therapeutic activities must not exceed 10
                            recipients.

                       · The behavioral health day services staff-to-recipient ratio during
                            therapeutic activities cannot exceed 1:5. Infant mental health aides may
                            be used to meet these staffing requirements.

Written Certification  Prior to a recipient receiving behavioral health day services, a physician or a
for Behavioral         LPHA experienced in the diagnosis of mental disorders in young children
Health Day Services    must provide written certification that:
for Recipients Ages
2 Years Through        · Recipient meets the service eligibility criteria.
5 Years                · Services can be expected to slow deterioration, or maintain or improve

                            the recipient's condition and functional level.
                       · Recipient's condition or functional level cannot be improved in a less

                            restrictive level of care.

Who Must Provide       Individual and family therapy services must be provided by one of the
                       following qualified practitioners:

                       · Physician
                       · Psychiatrist
                       · PPA
                       · Psychiatric ARNP
                       · LPHA
                       · Master's level CAP
                       · Master's level practitioner

March 2014                                                                                    2-24
                   Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Behavioral Health Therapy Services, continued

Who Must Provide,  Group therapy services must be provided by one of the following qualified
continued          practitioners:

                   · Physician
                   · Psychiatrist
                   · PPA
                   · Psychiatric ARNP
                   · LPHA
                   · Master's level CAP
                   · Master's level practitioner
                   · CAP
                   · Bachelor's level practitioner

                   Therapeutic care services must be provided by one of the following qualified
                   practitioners:

                   · Physician
                   · Psychiatrist
                   · PPA
                   · Psychiatric ARNP
                   · LPHA
                   · Master's level CAP
                   · Master's level practitioner
                   · CAP
                   · Bachelor's level practitioner
                   · Certified recovery peer specialist
                   · Certified psychiatric rehabilitation practitioner
                   · Certified recovery support specialist
                   · Certified behavioral health technician

                   A psychiatrist, LPHA, or master's level CAP must be available to provide
                   clinical consultation for both mental health and substance use day treatment
                   services during all hours of operation.

                   The behavioral health day services program for recipients ages 2 years
                   through 5 years must have, per group of 10, one of the following qualified
                   professionals who has training and experience in infant, toddler, and early
                   childhood development and the observation and assessment of young
                   children:

                   · Physician
                   · Psychiatrist
                   · PPA
                   · Psychiatric ARNP
                   · LPHA
                   · Master's level CAP
                   · Master's level practitioner
                   · Bachelor's level infant mental health practitioner

March 2014                                     2-25
                 Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Behavioral Health Therapy Services, continued

Specific         Documentation must include at least a daily progress note that addresses
Documentation    each service provided.
Requirements
                 For the behavioral health day services program for recipients ages 2 years
                 through 5 years, documentation must include a weekly summary note of the
                 specific therapeutic activities rendered that is signed by at least a master's
                 level practitioner.

Community Support and Rehabilitative Services

Introduction     Community support and rehabilitative services include:

                 · Psychosocial rehabilitation
                 · Clubhouse

                 These services encompass rehabilitation-focused, community-based
                 psychosocial services. Community support and rehabilitative services are
                 designed to assist recipients in strengthening or regaining interpersonal skills
                 and in developing environmental supports necessary to function in their
                 community.

Who Can Receive  Community support and rehabilitative services are appropriate for recipients
                 exhibiting psychiatric, behavioral or cognitive symptoms, addictive behavior,
                 or clinical conditions of sufficient severity to bring about significant impairment
                 in day-to-day personal, social, prevocational, and educational functioning.

Psychosocial     Psychosocial rehabilitation services are intended to restore a recipient's skills
Rehabilitation   and abilities essential for independent living. Activities include: development
Services         and maintenance of necessary daily living skills; food planning and
                 preparation; money management; maintenance of the living environment; and
                 training in appropriate use of community services. This service combines daily
                 medication use, independent living and social skills training, housing services,
                 prevocational and transitional employment rehabilitation training, social
                 support, and network enhancement to recipients and their families.

March 2014                                     2-26
                     Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Community Support and Rehabilitative Services, continued

Psychosocial         These services are designed to assist the recipient to eliminate or
Rehabilitation       compensate for functional deficits and interpersonal and environmental
Services, continued  barriers created by their disabilities, and to restore social skills for
                     independent living and effective life management. This activity differs from
                     counseling and therapy in that it concentrates less upon the amelioration of
                     symptoms and more upon restoring functional capabilities. The service may
                     also be used to facilitate cognitive and socialization skills necessary for
                     functioning in a work environment, focusing on maximum recovery and
                     independence. It includes work readiness assessment, job development on
                     behalf of the recipient, job matching, on the job training, and job support.

                     Psychosocial rehabilitation services may be provided in a facility, home, or
                     community setting.

Who Must Provide     Psychosocial rehabilitation services must be provided by one of the following
                     qualified professionals:

                     · Physician
                     · Psychiatrist
                     · PPA
                     · Psychiatric ARNP
                     · LPHA
                     · Master's level CAP
                     · Master's level practitioner
                     · CAP
                     · Bachelor's level practitioner
                     · Certified recovery peer specialist
                     · Certified psychiatric rehabilitation practitioner
                     · Certified recovery support specialist
                     · Certified behavioral health technician
                     · Substance abuse technician

Group Size           Medicaid will reimburse for provision of psychosocial rehabilitation services,
Restrictions         where the group size is equal to 12 or fewer.

Specific             Documentation must include at least a daily progress note that addresses
Documentation        each service provided.
Requirements

March 2014                                                                                     2-27
                    Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Community Support and Rehabilitative Services, continued

Clubhouse Services  Clubhouse services are structured, community-based group services provided
                    in a group rehabilitation service setting. These services include a range of
                    social, educational, pre-vocational and transitional employment rehabilitation
                    training in a group rehabilitation service setting utilizing behavioral, cognitive,
                    or supportive interventions to improve a recipient's potential for establishing
                    and maintaining social relationships and obtaining occupational or educational
                    achievements.

                    A clubhouse group service is designed to strengthen and improve the
                    recipient's interpersonal skills, and provide psychosocial therapy toward
                    rehabilitation that emphasizes a holistic approach focusing on the recipient's
                    strengths and abilities to promote recovery from mental illness. This service is
                    primarily rehabilitative in nature, using a wellness model that offers a setting
                    to restore independent living skills. These services are designed to assist the
                    recipient in eliminating the functional, interpersonal, and environmental
                    barriers created by their disabilities and to restore social skills for independent
                    living and effective life management. The service may also be used to
                    facilitate cognitive and socialization skills necessary for functioning in a work
                    environment focusing on maximum recovery and independence.

Who Can Receive     To be eligible for clubhouse services, recipients must:

                    · Have a mental health diagnosis.
                    · Be at least 16 years of age.

Who Must Provide    Clubhouse services must be provided by one of the following qualified
                    professionals:

                    · Physician
                    · Psychiatrist
                    · PPA
                    · Psychiatric ARNP
                    · LPHA
                    · Master's level CAP
                    · Master's level practitioner
                    · CAP
                    · Bachelor's level practitioner
                    · Certified recovery peer specialist
                    · Certified psychiatric rehabilitation practitioner
                    · Certified recovery support specialist
                    · Certified behavior health technician

March 2014                                                                                 2-28
               Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Community Support and Rehabilitative Services, continued

Group Size     Medicaid will reimburse for provision of clubhouse services up to 12
Restrictions   participants per staff member.

Specific       Documentation must include at least a daily progress note that addresses
Documentation  each service provided.
Requirements

Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services for Recipients Under the Age of 21 Years

Introduction   Therapeutic behavioral on-site services are intended to prevent recipients
               who have complex needs from requiring placement in a more intensive,
               restrictive behavioral health setting. These services are coordinated through
               individualized treatment teams and are designed to assist recipients and their
               families.

               The treatment team must include the recipient and recipient's family,
               guardian, caregivers, other persons who provide natural, informal support to
               the family system, and the professionals involved in providing services. The
               recipient-specific plan for therapeutic behavioral on-site services must be
               based on a thorough assessment, with input from the recipient and recipient's
               family, to identify needs, strengths, and desired service outcomes. When
               indicated by the assessment and agreed to by the family, the plan must
               reflect referral to, and coordination with, other agencies and resources.

               It is recognized that involvement of the family in the treatment of the recipient
               is necessary and appropriate. Provision of therapeutic behavioral on-site
               services with the family must clearly be directed toward meeting the
               recipient's identified treatment needs. Services provided to the recipient's
               family, independent of meeting the recipient's identified needs, are not
               reimbursable by Medicaid.

               If the assessment indicates a need for intensive, clinical therapeutic
               behavioral on-site services, and the family agrees to these services, the
               following services are reimbursable under Medicaid:

               · Therapeutic behavioral on-site--therapy services
               · Therapeutic behavioral on-site--behavior management services
               · Therapeutic behavioral on-site--therapeutic support services

               Therapeutic behavioral on-site services are intended to maintain the recipient
               in the home (permanent or foster). Services are limited to recipients under the
               age of 21 years meeting specific eligibility criteria.

March 2014                                                                           2-29
                       Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services for Recipients Under the Age of 21 Years,

continued

Eligibility Criteria   In order to receive therapeutic behavioral on-site services, a recipient must
                       meet one of the following eligibility critera:

                       · Under the age of 2 years and meets one of the following criteria:
                             - Exhibiting symptoms of an emotional or behavioral nature that are
                                  atypical for the recipient's age and development that interferes with
                                  social interaction and relationship development.
                             - Failure to thrive (due to emotional or psychosocial causes, not solely
                                  medical issues).

                       · Ages 2 years through 5 years and meets both of the following criteria:
                             - Exhibiting symptoms of an emotional or behavioral nature that are
                                  atypical for the recipient's age and development.
                             - Score in at least the moderate impairment range on a behavior and
                                  functional rating scale developed for the specific age group.

                       · Ages 6 years through 17 years and meets one of the following criteria:
                       · Have an emotional disturbance.
                       · Have a serious emotional disturbance.

                             - Have a substance use disorder.
                       · Ages 18 years through 20 years, but otherwise meets the criteria for an

                            emotional disturbance or a serious emotional.

Continued Eligibility  Within six months of the original determination of eligibility for services and
for Services           every six months thereafter, the members of the recipient's treatment team
                       must document that the recipient continues to meet the eligibility criteria
                       stated previously. The determination of eligibility must be maintained in the
                       recipient's clinical record.

                       Services may be authorized for less than six months.

Additional             If any component of the therapeutic behavioral on-site service is provided by
Treatment Plan         a different provider, the provider's name must be indicated on the plan. The
Documentation          plan and progress notes must reflect ongoing coordination with the other
Requirements           provider for the provision of services to the same recipient.

                       The treatment plan must include a specific schedule for review of the plan
                       with the recipient, the recipient's family, and others on the recipient's
                       treatment team and other providers rendering a component of the service.

March 2014                                                                         2-30
                  Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services for Recipients Under the Age of 21 Years,

continued

Formal Aftercare  The recipient and the recipient's family should collaborate with the treating
Plan              staff to develop the recipient's individualized formal aftercare plan within 45
                  days of admission to therapeutic behavioral on-site services. A formal
                  aftercare plan should include community resources, activities, services, and
                  supports that will be utilized to help the recipient sustain gains achieved
                  during treatment. The formal aftercare plan must be placed in the recipient's
                  clinical record.

Place of Service  Services must be provided in community settings, including where the
                  recipient resides and is educated. When possible, services should be
                  provided in settings where the recipient is experiencing emotional or
                  behavioral difficulties.

                  These services may not be provided in a psychiatric hospital, a psychiatric
                  unit of a general hospital, a crisis stabilization unit, or any other setting where
                  the same services are already being paid for by another source.

Therapy           Therapeutic behavioral on-site therapy services include the following:

                  · Individual and family therapy
                  · Collaborative development of the formal aftercare plan

Who Must Provide  Therapeutic behavioral on-site therapy services must be provided by one of
                  the following qualified professionals:

                  · Physician
                  · Psychiatrist
                  · LPHA
                  · Master's level CAP
                  · Master's level practitioner

                  Practitioners must have training and experience in infant, toddler, and early
                  childhood development and the observation and assessment of young
                  children when treating recipients under the age of 6 years.

March 2014                                                                                2-31
                     Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services for Recipients Under the Age of 21 Years,

continued

Behavior             Therapeutic behavioral on-site behavior management services include the
Management           following:

                     · On-going monitoring and assessment of the relationship between
                          interactions that motivate, maintain, or improve recipient behavior, and
                          the skill deficits and assets of the recipient and recipient's family,
                          caregivers, and other involved persons

                     · Development of an individual behavior plan, with measurable goals and
                          objectives that must be integrated into the recipient's treatment plan

                     · Training the recipient's family, caregivers, and other involved persons in
                          the implementation of the behavior plan

                     · Monitoring interactions between the recipient and the recipient's family,
                          caregivers, and other involved persons to measure progress

                     · Coordinating treatment plan services

Who Must Provide     Therapeutic behavioral on-site behavior management services must be
                     provided by a certified behavior analyst, certified assistant behavior analyst,
                     or by one of the following licensed practitioners who has three years of
                     behavior analysis experience and a minimum of 10 hours of documented
                     training every year, dedicated to behavior analysis:

                     · Clinical social worker
                     · Mental health counselor
                     · Marriage and family therapist
                     · Psychologist

                     Practitioners must have training and experience in infant, toddler, and early
                     childhood development and the observation and assessment of young
                     children when treating recipients under the age of 6 years.

Therapeutic Support  Therapeutic behavioral on-site therapeutic support services include the
                     following:

                     · One-to-one supervision and intervention with the recipient during
                          therapeutic activities

                     · Providing skills training in accordance with the recipient's treatment plan
                          to the recipient for restoration of basic living and social skills

                     · Assistance to the recipient and the recipient's family, caregivers, and
                          other involved persons in implementing the recipient's behavior plan

March 2014                                                                         2-32
                  Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services for Recipients Under the Age of 21 Years,

continued

One-to-One vs.    Therapeutic behavioral on-site therapeutic support services are considered
Group             primarily one-to-one interactions. When provided in a group, it must be in
                  response to a specific recommendation and must be justified by the treating
                  physician or treating LPHA in the recipient's treatment plan.

                  Under no circumstances may the group-to-staff ratio exceed four group
                  members to one staff person.

Who Must Provide  Therapeutic behavioral on-site therapeutic support services must be provided
                  by one of the following qualified professionals:

                  · Physician
                  · Psychiatrist
                  · PPA
                  · Psychiatric ARNP
                  · LPHA
                  · Master's level CAP
                  · Master's level practitioner
                  · Bachelor's level practitioner
                  · Certified behavior analyst
                  · Certified assistant behavior analyst
                  · Certified recovery peer specialist
                  · Certified psychiatric rehabilitation practitioner
                  · Certified recovery support specialist
                  · Certified behavioral health technician

                  Services for recipients under the age of 6 years must be provided by
                  bachelor's level infant mental health practitioners or higher. Practitioners must
                  have training and experience in infant, toddler, and early childhood
                  development and the observation and assessment of young children when
                  treating recipients under the age of 6 years.

March 2014                                                                         2-33
                  Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Nursing Facility Residents

Covered Services  Community behavioral health services for nursing facility residents, for whom
                  the nursing facility is billing Medicaid on a per diem basis, are only
                  reimbursable for recipients who have one of the following:

                  · Pre-Admission Screening and Resident Review-Level II (PASRR II)
                       evaluation that recommends community behavioral health services for the
                       recipient, completed by the Department of Children and Families or its
                       designee.

                  · A physician recommendation for community behavioral health services.
                  · A written referral from the nursing facility to a community behavioral

                       health services provider.

                  The referral from the nursing facility must be retained in the recipient's clinical
                  record. In addition, the recipient's individualized treatment plan must be
                  coordinated and integrated with the nursing facility's plan of care.

                  For nursing facilities billing Medicaid on a per diem basis, the following
                  services are reimbursable for residents, regardless of where the services are
                  rendered:

                  · Psychiatric evaluation by physician or psychiatrist
                  · Brief behavioral health status exam
                  · Psychiatric review of records
                  · In-depth assessment, new patient
                  · In-depth assessment, established patient
                  · Bio-psychosocial evaluation
                  · Psychological testing
                  · Limited functional assessment
                  · Treatment plan development
                  · Treatment plan review
                  · Medication management
                  · Brief individual medical psychotherapy
                  · Individual and family therapy

March 2014                  2-34
                   Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Excluded Services

Community          Medicaid does not reimburse for community behavioral health services for
Behavioral Health  treatment of a cognitive deficit severe enough to prohibit the service from
                   being of benefit to the recipient.

                   The following are services and supports not reimbursed under community
                   behavioral health services:

                   · Services provided to a recipient on the day of admission into the Statewide
                        Inpatient Psychiatric Program (SIPP); however, community behavioral
                        health services are reimbursable on the day of discharge

                   · Case management services
                   · Partial hospitalization
                   · Services rendered to individuals residing in an institution for mental

                        diseases
                   · Services rendered to institutionalized individuals, as defined in 42 CFR

                        435.1009
                   · Basic childcare programs for developmental delays, preschool, or

                        enrichment programs
                   · Travel time
                   · Activities performed to maintain and review records for facility utilization,

                        continuous quality improvement, recipient eligibility status processing, and
                        staff training purposes
                   · Activities (other than record reviews, services with family member or other
                        interested persons that benefit the recipient, or services performed using
                        telemedicine) that are not performed face-to-face with the recipient, except
                        those defined as:
                        - Services rendered by a recipient's relative
                        - Services rendered by unpaid interns or volunteers
                        - Services paid for by another funding source
                        - Escorting or transporting a recipient to and from a service site

March 2014         2-35
                    Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

                                          CHAPTER 3
                    REIMBURSEMENT AND FEE SCHEDULE

Overview            This chapter describes reimbursement and fee schedule information for
                    community behavioral health services.
Introduction
In This Chapter     This chapter contains the following section topics:

                     TOPIC                                               PAGE
                     Overview                                              3-1
                     Reimbursement Information                             3-1
                     How to Read the Fee Schedule                          3-3

Reimbursement Information

Procedure Codes     The procedure codes listed in this handbook are Healthcare Common
                    Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) Level II, which is a part of a nationally
                    standardized code set. Level II of the HCPCS is a standardized coding system
                    used primarily to identify products, supplies, and services not included in the
                    CPT codes. HCPCS Level II codes are also referred to as alpha-numeric
                    codes because they consist of a single alphabetical letter (A ­ V) followed by
                    four numeric digits. Please refer to the current HCPCS Level II Expert code
                    book for complete descriptions of the standard codes. The HCPCS Level II
                    Expert© code book is copyrighted by Ingenix, Inc. All rights reserved.

Copayment           Providers are required to collect a copayment of $2.00, per service, per day
                    from the recipient unless the recipient of the service is exempt.

                    Note: For information on copayments and the categories of recipients and
                    services exempt from the copayment, see the Florida Medicaid Provider
                    General Handbook.

In-Home Services    In-home services with the recipient's parent, guardian, or caregiver can be
for Recipients      billed as part of the day services program. If provided on a day when no
Under the Age of 6  behavioral health day services are billed, an in-home service may be billed as
Years               individual or family therapy or therapeutic behavioral on-site therapy services.

March 2014                                                                                        3-1
                   Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Reimbursement Information, continued

Units of Service   A unit of service is the number of times a procedure is performed. The
                   definition of unit varies by service.

                   For services defined in 15-minute increments, the total units of service for the
                   day must be entered on the claim form. If multiple units are provided on the
                   same day, the actual time spent must be totaled. If the minutes total ends in a
                   7 or less, round down to the nearest 15-minute increment. If the minutes total
                   ends in 8 or more, round up to the nearest 15-minute increment. For example,
                   37 minutes is billed as two units of service while, 38 minutes is billed as three
                   units of services. The provider may not round up each service episode to the
                   nearest 15-minute increment before summing the total.

                   Note: For more information on entering units of service on the claim, see the
                   Florida Medicaid Provider Reimbursement Handbook, CMS-1500.

Combinations of    The following services may not be reimbursed in conjunction with behavioral
Services that      health day services for the same recipient on the same day:
Cannot be
Reimbursed in                               Service             Procedure  Modifier (if
Conjunction with   Psychosocial Rehabilitative Services            Code     required)
Behavioral Health  Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services--       H2017
Day Services for   Therapy                                         H2019        HO
Recipients Ages 2  Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services--
Years Through 5    Behavior Management                          H2019      HM
Years              Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services--
                   Therapeutic Support
                                                                H2019      HN
                   Specialized Therapeutic Foster Care--
                   Level I                                      S5145
                   Specialized Therapeutic Foster Care--
                   Level II                                     S5145      HE
                   Specialized Therapeutic Foster Care--Crisis
                   Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site--             S5145      HK
                   Juvenile Justice
                   Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site--             H2020      HK
                   Child Welfare
                                                                H2020      HA

Service Limits     Service limits are per recipient, per state fiscal year (July 1 through June 30).
                   Medicaid will not reimburse for the same procedure code twice in one day.

March 2014                                                                     3-2
                Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

How to Read the Fee Schedule

Introduction    Procedure codes allowed for community behavioral health services are listed
                in the Procedures Codes and Fee Schedule in the appendices.

                The Procedures Codes and Fee Schedule includes the following information:

                · Description of covered service
                · Covered procedure code
                · Modifiers
                · Maximum fee per code
                · Reimbursement and service limitations

Description of  Describes the service to be reimbursed.
Service

Procedure Code  The code in the Procedure Codes and Fee Schedule, found in the appendices,
                that corresponds to community behavioral health services.

Modifier        For certain types of services, a two-digit modifier must be entered on the claim
                form. Modifiers more fully describe the procedure performed so that accurate
                payment may be determined.

Maximum Fee     Maximum amount that Medicaid will reimburse for the procedure code, per unit
                of service.

Reimbursement   Reimbursement and service limitations that pertain to the specific procedure
and Service     code.
Limitations

March 2014                                               3-3
                     Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

                                   APPENDIX A
            PROCEDURE CODES AND FEE SCHEDULE

March 2014  A-1
                          Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

                          PROCEDURE CODES AND FEE SCHEDULE

           These procedure codes are to be used for dates of service April 1, 2014 and after.

Description of            Procedure Modifier Modifier Maximum Fee Reimbursement and
    Service
                          Code   1   2                        Service Limitations

Assessment Services

Psychiatric evaluation by H2000  HP             $210.00 per   Medicaid reimburses a
                                                evaluation    maximum of two
physician                            GT $210.00 per           psychiatric evaluations
                                                evaluation    per recipient, per state
Psychiatric evaluation by H2000  HP             $150.00 per   fiscal year.*
                                                evaluation
physician--telemedicine                         $14.66 per    There is a maximum
                                                quarter hour  daily limit of two
Psychiatric evaluation by H2000  HO  GT $14.66 per            quarter-hour units.
                                                quarter hour
nonphysician                                                  Medicaid reimburses
                                                              for brief behavioral
Brief behavioral health   H2010  HO                           health status
                                                              examinations a
status exam                                                   maximum of 10
                                                              quarter-hour units
Brief behavioral health   H2010  HO                           annually (2.5 hours),
                                                              per recipient, per state
status exam--                                                 fiscal year.*

telemedicine

Psychiatric review of     H2000         $26.00 per            A brief behavioral
records                                 review                assessment is not
                                                              reimbursable on the
                                                              same day that a
                                                              psychiatric evaluation,
                                                              bio-psychosocial
                                                              assessment, or in-
                                                              depth assessment has
                                                              been completed by a
                                                              qualified treating
                                                              practitioner.
                                                              Medicaid reimburses a
                                                              maximum of two
                                                              psychiatric reviews of
                                                              records, per recipient,
                                                              per state fiscal year.*

                                                              This service may not
                                                              be billed for review of
                                                              lab work (see
                                                              medication
                                                              management).

*July 1 through June 30.

March 2014                                                                                     A-2
                          Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Description of            Procedure Modifier Modifier Maximum Fee Reimbursement and
    Service
                          Code   1   2                        Service Limitations

Assessment Services, continued

In-depth assessment,      H0031  HO             $125.00 per   Medicaid reimburses
                                                assessment    one in-depth
new patient, mental                                           assessment, per
                                     GT $125.00 per           recipient, per state
health                                          assessment    fiscal year.*

In-depth assessment,      H0031  HO             $100.00 per   An in-depth
                                                assessment    assessment is not
new patient, mental                                           reimbursable on the
                                     GT $100.00 per           same day for the same
health--telemedicine                            assessment    recipient as a bio-
                                                              psychosocial
In-depth assessment,      H0031  TS             $125.00 per   evaluation.
                                                assessment
established patient,                                          A bio-psychosocial
                                     GT $125.00 per           evaluation is not
mental health                                   assessment    reimbursable for the
                                                              same recipient after an
In-depth assessment,      H0031  TS             $100.00 per   in-depth assessment
                                                assessment    has been completed,
established patient,                                          unless there is a
                                     GT $100.00 per           documented change in
mental health--                                 assessment    the recipient's status
                                                              and additional
telemedicine                                    $48.00 per    information must be
                                                assessment    gathered to modify the
In-depth assessment,      H0001  HO                           recipient's treatment
                                     GT $48.00 per            plan.
new patient, substance                          assessment    Medicaid reimburses
                                                              one bio-psychosocial
abuse                                           $48.00 per    evaluation, per
                                                assessment    recipient, per state
In-depth assessment,      H0001  HO                           fiscal year.*
                                     GT $48.00 per
new patient, substance                          assessment    A bio-psychosocial
                                                              evaluation is not
abuse--telemedicine                             $15.00 per    reimbursable on the
                                                quarter hour  same day for the same
In-depth assessment,      H0001  TS                           recipient as an in-
                                                              depth assessment.
established patient,
                                                              Medicaid reimburses a
substance abuse                                               maximum of 40
                                                              quarter-hour units (10
In-depth assessment,      H0001  TS                           hours) of psychological
                                                              testing, per recipient,
established patient,                                          per state fiscal year.*

substance abuse--

telemedicine

Bio-psychosocial          H0031  HN

Evaluation, mental

health

Bio-psychosocial          H0031  HN

evaluation, mental

health--telemedicine

Bio-psychosocial          H0001  HN

evaluation, substance

abuse

Bio-psychosocial          H0001  HN

evaluation, substance

abuse--telemedicine

Psychological testing     H2019

*July 1 through June 30.

March 2014                                                    A-3
                          Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Description of            Procedure Modifier Modifier Maximum Fee Reimbursement and
    Service
                          Code   1           2              Service Limitations

Assessment Services, continued

Limited functional        H0031                 $15.00 per  Medicaid reimburses a
                                                assessment  maximum of three
assessment, mental                                          limited functional
                                                $15.00 per  assessments, per
health                                          assessment  recipient, per state
                                                            fiscal year.*
Limited functional        H0031  GT             $15.00 per
                                                assessment
assessment, mental
                                                $15.00 per
health--telemedicine                            assessment

Limited functional        H0001

assessment, substance

abuse

Limited functional        H0001  GT

assessment, substance

abuse--telemedicine

Treatment Plan Development and Modification

Treatment plan            H0032                 $97.00 per  Medicaid reimburses
                                                event       for the development of
development, new and                                        one treatment plan per
                                                $97.00 per  provider, per state
established patient,                            event       fiscal year.*

mental health                                               Medicaid reimburses
                                                            for a maximum total of
Treatment plan            T1007                             two treatment plans
                                                            per recipient per state
development, new and                                        fiscal year.*

established patient,

substance abuse

Treatment plan review,    H0032  TS             $48.50 per  The reimbursement
                                                event       date for treatment plan
mental health                                   $48.50 per  development is the
                                                event       day it is authorized by
Treatment plan review,    T1007  TS                         the treating
                                                            practitioner.
substance abuse                                             Medicaid reimburses a
                                                            maximum of four
                                                            treatment plan
                                                            reviews, per recipient,
                                                            per state fiscal year.*

                                                            The reimbursement
                                                            date for a treatment
                                                            plan review is the day
                                                            it is authorized by the
                                                            treating practitioner.

*July 1 through June 30.

March 2014                                                  A-4
                          Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Description of            Procedure Modifier Modifier Maximum Fee Reimbursement and
    Service
                          Code    1   2                        Service Limitations

Medical and Psychiatric Services                 $60.00 per    Medicaid reimburses
                                                 event         medication
Medication management T1015                      $60.00 per    management as
                                                 event         medically necessary.
Medication                T1015   GT
management--                                     $15.00 per    Medication
telemedicine                                     quarter hour  management is not
                                      GT $15.00 per            reimbursable on the
Brief individual medical  H2010   HE             quarter hour  same day, for the
                                                 $15.00 per    same recipient, as
psychotherapy, mental                            quarter hour  brief group medical
                                      GT $15.00 per            therapy or brief
health                                           quarter hour  individual medical
                                                               psychotherapy.
Brief individual medical  H2010   HE                           There is a maximum
                                                               daily limit of two
psychotherapy, mental                                          quarter-hour units.

health--telemedicine                                           Medicaid reimburses a
                                                               maximum of 16
Brief individual medical  H2010   HF                           quarter-hour units (4
                                                               hours) of brief
psychotherapy,                                                 individual medical
                                                               psychotherapy, per
substance abuse                                                recipient, per state
                                                               fiscal year.*
Brief individual medical  H2010   HF
                                                               Brief individual medical
psychotherapy,                                                 psychotherapy is not
                                                               reimbursable on the
substance abuse--                                              same day, for the
                                                               same recipient, as
telemedicine                                                   brief group medical
                                                               therapy or medication
                                                               management.

*July 1 through June 30.

March 2014                                                     A-5
                          Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Description of            Procedure Modifier Modifier Maximum Fee Reimbursement and
    Service
                          Code   1           2                Service Limitations

Medical and Psychiatric Services, continued

Brief group medical       H2010  HQ             $8.65 per     There is a maximum
                                                quarter hour  daily limit of two
therapy                                                       quarter-hour units.

                                                              Medicaid reimburses a
                                                              maximum of 18
                                                              quarter-hour units (4.5
                                                              hours) of group
                                                              medical therapy, per
                                                              recipient, per state
                                                              fiscal year.*

Behavioral health         T1023  HE             $43.62 per    Brief group medical
medical screening,                              event         therapy is not
mental health             T1023  HF                           reimbursable on the
Behavioral health                               $43.62 per    same day, for the
medical screening,                              event         same recipient as brief
substance abuse                                               individual medical
                                                              psychotherapy or
                                                              behavioral health-
                                                              related medical
                                                              services: verbal
                                                              interactions,
                                                              medication
                                                              management.
                                                              Medicaid reimburses
                                                              two behavioral health
                                                              medical screening
                                                              services, per recipient,
                                                              per state fiscal year.*

                                                              Behavioral health-
                                                              related medical
                                                              screening services are
                                                              not reimbursable on
                                                              the same day, for the
                                                              same recipient, as
                                                              behavioral health-
                                                              related medical
                                                              services: verbal
                                                              interactions,
                                                              medication
                                                              management.

*July 1 through June 30.

March 2014                                                    A-6
                           Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Description of             Procedure Modifier Modifier Maximum Fee Reimbursement and
    Service
                           Code   1          2                  Service Limitations

Medical and Psychiatric Services, continued

Behavioral health--        H0046                $15.00 per      Medicaid reimburses
                                                event           52 behavioral health-
related medical services:                                       related medical
                                                $15.00 per      services: medical
verbal interaction,                             event           procedures, per
                                                                recipient, per state
mental health                                   $15.00 per      fiscal year.*
                                                event
Behavioral health-         H0046  GT                            Behavioral health-
                                                $15.00 per      related medical
related medical services:                       event           services: verbal
                                                                interactions are not
verbal interaction,                                             reimbursable on the
                                                                same day as
mental health--                                                 behavioral health
                                                                screening services.
telemedicine

Behavioral health-         H0047

related medical services:

verbal interaction,

substance abuse

Behavioral health-         H0047  GT

related medical services:

verbal interaction,

substance abuse--

telemedicine

Behavioral health-         T1015  HE            $10.00 per      Medicaid reimburses
                                                event           52 behavioral health-
related medical services:                                       related medical
                                                $10.00 per      services: medical
medical procedures,                             event           procedures, per
                                                                recipient, per state
mental health                                                   fiscal year.*

Behavioral health-         T1015  HF

related medical services:

medical procedures,

substance abuse

Behavioral health-         H0048                $10.00 per      Medicaid reimburses
                                                event           52 behavioral health-
related medical services:                                       related medical
                                                $67.48, weekly  services: alcohol and
alcohol and other drug                          rate            other drug screening
                                                                specimen collections,
screening specimen                                              per recipient, per state
                                                                fiscal year.*
collection                                                      Medicaid reimburses
                                                                medication-assisted
Medication-assisted        H0020                                treatment services 52
treatment services                                              times, per recipient,
                                                                per state fiscal year.*
                                                                The service is billed
                                                                one time per seven
                                                                days.

                                                                This service is not
                                                                reimbursable using
                                                                any other procedure
                                                                code.

*July 1 through June 30.

March 2014                                                      A-7
                          Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Description of            Procedure Modifier Modifier Maximum Fee Reimbursement and
    Service
                          Code      1   2                        Service Limitations

Behavioral Health Therapy Services

Individual and family     H2019     HR             $18.33 per    Medicaid reimburses a
                                                   quarter hour  maximum of 104
therapy                                 GT $18.33 per            quarter-hour units (26
                                                   quarter hour  hours) of individual
Individual and family     H2019     HR                           and family therapy
                                                                 services, per recipient,
therapy--telemedicine                                            per state fiscal year.*

Group therapy             H2019     HQ     $6.67 per             There is a maximum
                                           quarter hour          daily limit of four
Behavioral health day     H2012                                  quarter-hour units (1
                                           $12.50 per hour       hour).
services, mental health                    $12.50 per hour       Medicaid reimburses a
                                                                 maximum of 156
Behavioral health day     H2012     HF                           quarter-hour units (39
                                                                 hours) of group
services, substance                                              therapy services, per
                                                                 recipient, per state
abuse                                                            fiscal year.*
                                                                 Medicaid reimburses a
                                                                 maximum of 190-hour
                                                                 units (47.5 hours; 11.9
                                                                 half-days) per
                                                                 recipient, per state
                                                                 fiscal year.*

                                                                 Medicaid will not
                                                                 reimburse for
                                                                 behavioral health day
                                                                 services the same day
                                                                 as psychosocial
                                                                 rehabilitation services.

*July 1 through June 30.

March 2014                                                       A-8
                           Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Description of             Procedure Modifier Modifier Maximum Fee  Reimbursement/
    Service
                           Code   1            2                    Service Limitations

Community Support and Rehabilitative Services

Psychosocial               H2017                  $9.00 per         Medicaid reimburses a
                                                  quarter hour      maximum of 1,920
rehabilitation services                                             units (480 hours; 20
                                                                    days) of psychosocial
                                                                    rehabilitation services,
                                                                    per recipient, per state
                                                                    fiscal year.*

Clubhouse services         H2030                  $5.00 per         These units count
                                                  quarter hour      against clubhouse
                                                                    service units.
                                                                    Medicaid reimburses
                                                                    clubhouse services for
                                                                    a maximum of 1920
                                                                    quarter-hour units (480
                                                                    hours; 20 days)
                                                                    annually, per recipient,
                                                                    per state fiscal year.*

                                                                    These units count
                                                                    against psychosocial
                                                                    rehabilitation units of
                                                                    service.

Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services for Recipients Under the Age of 21 Years

Therapeutic behavioral     H2019  HO              $16.00 per        Medicaid reimburses

on-site services, therapy                         quarter hour      therapeutic behavioral

                                                                    on-site therapy

                                                                    services a maximum

                                                                    combined limit of a

                                                                    total of 36, 15-minute

                                                                    units per month( 9

                                                                    hours) by a master's

                                                                    level or certified

                                                                    behavioral analyst.

*July 1 through June 30.

March 2014                                                                               A-9
                        Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

Description of          Procedure Modifier Modifier Maximum Fee  Reimbursement/
    Service
                        Code   1   2                             Service Limitations

Therapeutic Behavioral On-Site Services for Recipients Under the Age of 21 Years, continued

Therapeutic behavioral  H2019  HN     $10.00 per                 Medicaid reimburses

on-site services,                     quarter hour               therapeutic behavioral

behavior management                                              on-site behavior

                                                                 management and

                                                                 therapeutic behavioral

                                                                 on-site therapy

                                                                 services for a

                                                                 maximum combined

                                                                 total of 36, 15-minute

                                                                 units per month by a

                                                                 master's level

                                                                 practitioner, certified

                                                                 behavioral analyst, or

                                                                 certified associate

                                                                 behavioral analyst.

Therapeutic behavioral  H2019  HM     $4.00 per                  Medicaid reimburses

on-site services,                     quarter hour               therapeutic behavioral

therapeutic support                                              on-site therapeutic

                                                                 support services for a

                                                                 maximum of 128

                                                                 quarter-hour units per

                                                                 month (32 hours), per

                                                                 recipient.

March 2014                                                                                   A-10
                    Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

                                   APPENDIX B
            TEMPORARY SERVICE AUTHORIZATION

March 2014  B-1
                                       Community Behavioral Health Services Coverage and Limitations Handbook

                         TEMPORARY SERVICE AUTHORIZATION

Recipient name:
Recipient Medicaid number:
Date of service(s):
Service(s) provided:

Medicaid procedure code(s):

I have reviewed the relevant clinical information and confirm that the service(s) provided was
(were) medically necessary.

Treating Practitioner's Signature  Date
Treating Practitioner's Name

To be placed in the recipient's medical record.
AHCA Form 5000-3510, Revised December 2012 (incorporated by reference in Rule 59G-4.050, F.A.C.)

March 2014                                                                                      B-2
